IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

2437 

# Chain-of-Thought in Neural Code Generation: From and for Lightweight Language Models 

Guang Yang , Yu Zhou , Xiang Chen , Xiangyu Zhang , Terry Yue Zhuo , and Taolue Chen 

**_Abstract_ —Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential in code generation. The integration of Chain of Thought (CoT) reasoning can further boost their performance. However, current CoT methods often require manual writing or LLMs with over 100 billion parameters to generate, impeding their applicability in resource-constrained scenarios. In this study, we investigate lightweight Language Models (** **_ℓ_ LMs), which are defined to have fewer than 10 billion parameters. Empirically, we find that most** **_ℓ_ LMs cannot generate high-quality CoTs when prompted by the few-shot method, but can take advantage of high-quality CoTs generated elsewhere to improve their performance in code generation. Based on these findings, we design a novel approach COTTON which can leverage** **_ℓ_ LMs to automatically generate CoTs for code generation. We synthesize new datasets and conduct extensive experiments on various benchmarks. The results show that the CoTs generated by COTTON outperform the baselines in terms of automated and human evaluation metrics. In particular, the CoTs generated by COTTON boost various** **_ℓ_ LMs to achieve higher performance gains than those generated by LLMs such as ChatGLM (130B), and are competitive with those generated by Gemini and gpt-3.5-turbo. The results also reveal that COTTON not only improves the performance of** **_ℓ_ LMs, but also enhances the performance of LLMs. Our study showcases the potential of** **_ℓ_ LMs in software engineering applications.** 

Manuscript received 9 December 2023; revised 10 June 2024; accepted 3 August 2024. Date of publication 12 August 2024; date of current version 19 September 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62372232, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant NG2023005, in part by the Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, in part by the Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province under Grant KYCX23_0396, and in part by the Short-term Visiting Program of Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics for Ph.D. Students Abroad under Grant 240501DF16. The work of Taolue Chen was supported by the oversea grants from the State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University under Grant KFKT2022A03 and Grant KFKT2023A04. Recommended for acceptance by Y. Xiong. _(Corresponding authors: Yu Zhou; Taolue Chen.)_ 

Guang Yang, Yu Zhou, and Xiangyu Zhang are with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China (e-mail: novelyg@outlook.com; zhouyu@nuaa.edu.cn; zhangx1angyu@nuaa.edu.cn). 

Xiang Chen is with the School of Information Science and Technology, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, China (e-mail: xchencs@ntu.edu.cn). Terry Yue Zhuo is with Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia and CSIRO’s Data61, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia (e-mail: terryzhuo25@gmail.com). 

Taolue Chen is with the School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, WC1E 7HX London, U.K. (e-mail: t.chen@bbk.ac.uk). 

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSE.2024.3440503 

**_Index Terms_ —Code generation, chain-of-thought, large language model, lightweight language model, program language processing.** 

## I. INTRODUCTION 

EURAL code generation, which can automatically gen- **N** erate programs from natural language requirements based on deep learning, has become a promising approach to meet the challenges of the ever-increasing complexity of software and alleviate the burden on programmers [1], [2]. Recently, large language models (LLMs), such as GPT4 [3], have demonstrated impressive performance in code generation tasks [4]. The stateof-the-art LLMs normally have over 100 billion parameters, making even their deployment highly non-trivial. These LLMs pose challenges in terms of time, computational, and financial costs when applied to code generation, rendering them impractical for most individual users, or in resource-constrained scenarios, such as restricted access to LLM APIs or constrained GPU availability. [5], [6]. For software engineering applications, it is imperative to develop _lightweight_ language-model-based techniques that are more friendly for users (e.g., individual end users). Fu et al. [7] defined models with parameters greater than 100B as large models and those with parameters less than 10B as small models. Admittedly, the precise definition of large and small models is debatable and may evolve with the advance of technology. In this study, we define (pre-trained) language models (LMs) with less than 10 billion parameters as _lightweight Language Models_ ( _ℓ_ LM), the rationale of which is that these models can be deployed on a single user graphics card (e.g., RTX 3090 or RTX 4090) based on the current technology. The general aim is to develop techniques to tackle software engineering challenges based on _ℓ_ LMs but with competitive performance as state-of-the-art LLMs, which would enable efficient, yet more accessible, software engineering applications. 

Recent studies [8], [9], [10], [11] have highlighted the importance of enhancing LLM performance by providing adequate information in the prompts. To improve LLMs without retraining or fine-tuning, researchers have resorted to Chain of Thought (CoT) techniques [12]. A CoT is, in a nutshell, a series of intermediate natural language reasoning steps that lead to the final output, which enables LLMs to provide more reliable answers through thoughtful consideration and explanation. CoT techniques have shown effectiveness in logical reasoning tasks by breaking them down into understandable intermediate steps, enabling LLMs to handle each step individually. This process 

0098-5589 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

2438 





Fig. 1. The motivating examples illustrating the potential of using chain-of-thought for _ℓ_ LMs in code generation. 

not only enhances model performance but also offers the potential for model interpretability. 

Inspired by the success of CoT techniques in logical reasoning, researchers have explored their application in the code generation task. For example, Jiang et al. [13] proposed a selfplanning approach. Li et al. [14] introduced a structured CoT approach to assist models in understanding complex intentions and reducing problem-solving difficulties. Zhuo [15] introduced an evaluation metric for code generation based on LLMs and demonstrated that CoT can enhance evaluation reliability. 

The previous research has primarily focused on investigating the impact of CoT on LLMs, leaving questions regarding whether _ℓ_ LMs can also benefit from the guidance of CoT. In Fig. 1, we present a motivation example to demonstrate the potential of CoT for _ℓ_ LMs in code generation. Specifically, in Fig.1(a), the programming task is choose_num, which takes two positive numbers _x_ and _y_ and returns the largest even integer that falls into the interval [ _x, y_ ]. The example highlights that the original prompts for the _ℓ_ LMs (CodeGen-350M, CodeGen2B, and CodeGen-6B) fail to generate correct code solutions. However, by leveraging CoT in Fig.1(b), we modify the original prompt by using “How to solve:” and breaking down the problem into multiple steps, where the natural language explanations guide the model’s understanding of the task, including instructions on branching and looping structures. With the new CoT, these _ℓ_ LMs can generate correct code solutions. 

Furthermore, previous studies possess certain limitations as the current methods for CoT generation heavily rely on manual writing of CoTs or the utilization of LLMs [16], [17], leading to high costs. These limitations motivate us to investigate the following two main questions. (1) Can _ℓ_ LMs independently generate high-quality CoTs to guide code generation, and (2) can _ℓ_ LMs benefit from generated CoTs? Here, “independently” means no model training or model parameter updating. 

**Empirical observations.** To address the first question, we conduct empirical studies on the CoT generation capabilities of 11 different _ℓ_ LMs and two LLMs. We adopt a zero-shot approach [18] and some few-shot approaches (such as Self-planning [13], SCoT [14], and the self-cot we propose), which provide _ℓ_ LMs with a set of examples to generate the corresponding CoT. 

Our finding shows that most _ℓ_ LMs with parameter scales ranging from 0.3 to 7 billion, unfortunately, did _not_ demonstrate the ability to generate high-quality CoTs independently (cf. Section V-A for details). To address the second question, we compare the performance of _ℓ_ LMs in code generation _with_ and _without_ CoTs. Our findings suggest that all _ℓ_ LMs obtain performance improvement with the CoTs. As an example, the performance of the CodeT5 + 6B model on the HumanEval-plus dataset [4] can be improved from 26.83% to 43.90% with the CoTs generated by our methods (cf. Section V-C for details). 

Fig. 1 provides a motivation example, where CodeGen [19] is used as a case study. We evaluate its performance by considering varying parameter sizes 350M, 2B, and 6B. Without CoT, these models did not generate the correct code (cf. Fig 1(a)). However, with CoT, we decompose user requirements into three intermediate steps. In the first step, we initialize a variable max_even as -1; in the second step, we define the details of loop conditions and judgment conditions; in the third step, we return the value. As such, we can effectively instruct the models on the necessary actions at each step, and they eventually generate semantically correct code (though these variables have different names). 

**Technical contributions.** Based on the empirical observations, a natural question is how to enable _ℓ_ LMs to generate meaningful CoTs for code generation. To this end, we design a novel approach COTTON ( **C** hain **O** f **T** hough **T** c **O** de ge **N** eration). Specifically, COTTON contains data collection, model training, and model inference steps. To build the corpus, we first mine shared open source datasets (such as TheVault [20]) to gather pairs of natural language and programming language. Then, we improve the dataset quality by using carefully designed heuristic cleaning rules. To ensure the quality of CoTs in the corpus, we use ChatGPT as the base agent and propose a multiagent alignment method to construct high-quality CoTs (details in Section III-A). Finally, our collected CodeCoT-9k consists of 9,264 data pairs. 

For model training, we employ CodeLlama-7b<sup>1</sup> as the base model to generate CoTs automatically based on the given 

1https://github.com/facebookresearch/codellama 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

2439 

prompt. CodeLlama-7b incorporates advanced techniques (such as RMSNorm [21] and Group Query Attention [22]), which enhance its performance beyond the Transformer [23]. By applying these techniques, we can further improve the performance of COTTON. To reduce the training cost, we adopt instructiontuning and LoRA techniques [24] to fine-tune the model parameters. This approach allows COTTON to be trained efficiently on a single consumer graphics card while maintaining its performance. 

**Evaluation.** We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the quality of the CoTs generated by COTTON on the HumanEval benchmark [25]. To ensure the generalizability of COTTON, we further collected a new code generation dataset OpenEval, and evaluated COTTON on the OpenEval benchmark as well. Specifically, we selected nine other commonly used models as base models and compared the results with the same training process. The quality of CoTs generated by COTTON is superior to others in both automated and human evaluation metrics. Furthermore, we evaluate the performance on _ℓ_ LMs when adopting the generated CoTs on code generation benchmarks (such as HumanEval, HumanEval-plus, and OpenEval). The results show that, for various _ℓ_ LMs, the CoTs generated by COTTON achieve higher performance gains than those generated by LLMs such as ChatGLM (130B) [26], and are competitive with those generated by Gemini and gpt-3.5-turbo. 

Taking the CodeT5+ 6B model as an example, we observed significant performance improvements on the HumanEval, HumanEval-plus, and OpenEval benchmarks by incorporating COTTON. For the pass@1 metric on HumanEval and HumanEval-plus, COTTON enhances the performance of the CodeT5+ 6B model from 26.22% and 26.83% to 42.68% and 43.90% respectively. In comparison, the LLM ChatGLM 130B only achieves an improvement of 36.59%. Similarly, on the OpenEval benchmark, COTTON boosts the pass@1 metric of the CodeT5+ 6B model from 20.22% to 35.39%. Meanwhile, the LLM ChatGLM 130B achieves an improvement of only about 32.02%. 

In addition, to further evaluate the capabilities of COTTON, we conducted experiments to assess its impact on LLMs (such as gpt-3.5-turbo). The results show that gpt-3.5-turbo could show a significant performance improvement in code generation when guided by the CoTs generated by COTTON where the performance even exceeds that of the GPT-4 zero-shot scenario on the HumanEval dataset. 

Finally, to demonstrate the effectiveness of COTTON compared to fine-tuning, we utilize the StarCoder-series models as examples. The results indicate that the combination of StarCoder-7B with COTTON has already exceeded the performance of StarCoder-16B in zero-shot scenarios and can even achieve comparable results to a fine-tuned StarCoder-16B model. The efficacy of COTTON in enhancing performance across multiple models without the necessity of fine-tuning individual model is noteworthy, as it not only saves time and computation resources for model construction but also opens an inviting avenue to avoid traditional fine-tuning in adapting language models. 

In summary, the main contributions of our study can be summarized as follows: 

- We empirically show that most existing _ℓ_ LMs lack the capability to generate high-quality CoT independently. 

- We design a novel approach COTTON to generate highquality CoTs for guiding code generation, the efficacy of which has been confirmed by extensive experiments on a comprehensive set of benchmarks. 

- We construct a new dataset of high-quality CoTs, i.e., CodeCoT-9k, by mining existing open-source datasets. Moreover, we also construct OpenEval<sup>2</sup> , another dataset to benchmark the code generation performance. These datasets could be reused in similar software engineering tasks. 

To facilitate the replication of COTTON, we make our source code, trained models, and datasets publicly available on GitHub.<sup>3</sup> 

**Structure of the paper.** The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides preliminary knowledge related to our study. Section III describes the framework of COTTON and its key components. Sections IV and V present the experimental design and the result analysis respectively. Section VI further discusses our approach followed by the related work review in Section VII. Section VIII concludes our study and outlines possible future directions. 



In this section, we first formulate the code generation task. Then we provide the fundamental concepts of our used base model CodeLlama. 

## _A. Code Generation Task Formulation_ 

Let _D_ = _{_ ( _Xi, Yi_ ) _}_<sup>_|D|_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>denoteacodegenerationdataset,</sup> comprising _|D|_ pairs ( _Xi, Yi_ ). Here, _Xi_ represents the functional description, and _Yi_ represents the corresponding code snippet. Neural code generation model _Mcode_ aims to generate _Yi_ conditioned on _Xi_ . This autoregressive generation process is parameterized by _θcode_ , and can be expressed as 



where _Yi,_ 1 : _Yi,k−_ 1 represents the previous sequence before the _k_ -th token of _Yi_ , and _n_ denotes the number of tokens in the target sequence _Yi_ . 

To improve the code generation performance, we utilize a CoT generation model, denoted as _Mcot_ , which generates highquality CoT _Ci_ based on _Xi_ . Then the original input sequence _Xi_ will be augmented by concatenating with the generated CoT _Ci_ , resulting in a new input sequence _X_<sup>ˆ</sup> _i_ = _Xi ⊕ Ci_ , where _⊕_ denotes the concatenation operation. Subsequently, we approximate the probability of generating the code snippet _Yi_ given 

2https://github.com/NTDXYG/open-eval 

3https://github.com/NTDXYG/COTTON 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

2440 

the input sequence _Xi_ as 



In our study, we treat the existing neural code generation model _Mcode_ as a black box. We intend to train a model _Mcot_ to generate CoTs, which can be used to guide code generation and further improve the performance of this task. 

## _B. Code Language Model CodeLlama_ 

CodeLlama [27] is a code language model built on Llama-2 [28], which stands out for its exceptional performance in open models, padding capabilities, support for large input contexts, and zero-sample instruction tracking for programming tasks. In our study, we use CodeLlama-7B as the base model for COTTON due to its remarkable code understanding and generation capabilities. 

**Embedding Layer.** CodeLlama tokenizes the given functional description _X_ into sub token sequences _{wi}_<sup>_N_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>using byte-pair</sup> encoding (BPE) and the SentencePiece algorithm [29]. Each sub-word _wi_ is then transformed into an embedding (row) vector **_x_** _i ∈_ R<sup>_d_</sup> , where _d_ represents the dimension of the embedding vector. These embedding vectors are combined into a matrix **_X_** = _{_ **_x_** _i}_<sup>_N_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>,whichrepresentsthemeaningfulrelationship</sup> between the tokens in the input sequence. By using this embedding matrix, COTTON captures the semantic information of the functional description and prepares it for further processing in the subsequent layers of the model. 

**RMSNorm.** CodeLlama utilizes Root Mean Square Layer Normalization (RMSNorm) instead of LayerNorm for normalization purposes [21]. RMSNorm operates by normalizing each embedding vector **_x_** _i_ by dividing it through the root mean square. This normalization process helps reduce the impact of noise and improves computational efficiency. For each embedding vector **_x_** _i_ , the calculation formula of RMSNorm is defined as follows. 



where _RMS_ ( **_X_** ) = 1 � _ni_ =1<sup>**_x_**</sup> _i_<sup>2representstherootmean</sup> � _n_ square of the embedding matrix **_X_** , and _gi_ denotes the rescale factor. 

**Group Query Attention (GQA).** CodeLlama introduces GQA [22] as a modification to the standard multi-head attention mechanism. This modification optimizes the model’s performance by dividing the Query heads into groups, with each group sharing the same Key and Value matrix. Moreover, the model incorporates Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE) [30] and FlashAttention [31] for further improvement. 

Specifically, for the given matrix **_X_** , the model computes the Query, Key, and Value matrix as follows. 



where **_q_** _i_ represents the Query vector of the embedding vector **_x_** _i_ , incorporating the position information. **_k_** _j_ and **_v_** _j_ denote the Key and Value vectors of the embedding vector **_x_** _j_ , respectively, incorporating the position information _j_ . The grouping operation is applied to ensure that the Query heads within each group share the same Key and Value matrix. To compute the self-attention output corresponding to the _i_ -th embedding vector **_x_** _i_ , an attention score is computed between **_q_** _i_ and the other **_k_** _j_ vectors. This attention score is then multiplied by the corresponding **_v_** _j_ vectors and summed to obtain the output vector. 



where _ai,j_ represents the attention score and **_o_** _i_ denotes the output vector for the _i_ -th embedding vector. **FFN.** The Feed Forward Network (FFN) in CodeLlama consists of linear layers and an activation function. It operates on the matrix **_X_** to calculate the output using a specific formula. 



where _SiLU_ represents the activation function, defined as the element-wise product of the Sigmoid function and the input. This activation function introduces non-linearity to the network. 

During the overall process, CodeLlama generates the output probability _P_ for a given input **_X_** through a series of operations, including Group Query Attention, RMSNorm, and FFN. Initially, the input **_X_** is normalized using RMSNorm. Then, GQA is applied to the normalized input and added to the original input, resulting in **_X_** _hidden_ . Next, **_X_** _hidden_ is again normalized using RMSNorm, and FFN is applied to it, obtaining **_X_** _final_ . Finally, **_X_** _final_ is normalized using RMSNorm and passed through the function _fvocab_ to map it to the output probability space, resulting in the final output probability _P_ . 





The workflow of our proposed COTTON is shown in Fig. 2. There are three major steps, i.e., data collection, model training, and model inference. In the rest of this section, we show the details of these three steps. 

## _A. Data Collection_ 

The construction of the CoT dataset CodeCoT-9k follows the process shown in Step 1 in Fig. 2. We begin by selecting TheVault<sup>4</sup> , MBPP<sup>5</sup> and LeetCode<sup>6</sup> as our raw datasets. These datasets consist of natural language descriptions of functional requirements paired with corresponding implementation code snippets. They have been widely used in the literature [32]. 

> 4https://github.com/FSoft-AI4Code/TheVault 

> 5https://huggingface.co/datasets/mbpp 

> 6https://huggingface.co/datasets/mhhmm/leetcode-solutions-python 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

2441 



Fig. 2. The workflow of the proposed approach COTTON. 

However, after our manual analysis, we find that a significant portion of the code snippets in these datasets are not selfcontained, requiring external modules or files for program comprehension [33], which poses challenges for CoT generation. In addition, we notice that some code snippets consist of trivial or template code (for defining constants, setting parameters, configuring GUI elements, etc), which is not useful for CoT generation. As a result, to improve the quality of our dataset, we design two data cleaning methods, i.e., heuristic rule-based cleaning and multi-agent alignment-based cleaning. 

**Heuristic rule-based cleaning.** These rules are designed to filter data that contains syntactically incorrect code and documents that are inconsistent with the code, in addition to avoiding data leakage problem. We define three heuristic rules as below. 

- **R1** Code Filtering. We utilize the AST parser tool to extract method-level code and corresponding functional comments, by which syntactically incorrect code can be 

- **R2** Doc Filtering. We utilize DocChecker [34] to determine the consistency between the documentation and the code, which can maintain an accurate alignment between the comments and the code effectively. We then remove code snippets with inconsistent documentation. 

- **R3** Similarity Filtering. To prevent data leakage in the training set, We utilize the codet5p embedding model<sup>7</sup> for code representation learning. We then remove the code snippets that exceed the semantic similarity threshold by considering the cosine similarity. 

**Multi-agent alignment-based cleaning.** These agents are designed to filter low-quality data, including snippets that are not educationally meaningful and CoTs that are inconsistent with the semantics of the code. We leverage the power of multiagents to align and clean the data, where they are based on gpt3.5-turbo.<sup>8</sup> Specifically, we implement the agent definition by constructing the specific prompt [35]: 

- **A1 Quality Checker** . This agent assesses the educational value of the data and removes low-quality items, ensuring that the dataset comprises high-quality code snippets. 

- **A2 CoT Generator.** We first transform code snippets and functional comments into a standardized prompt and 

7https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/codet5p-110m-embedding 

solution format similar to HumanEval [25]. This agent employs a one-shot approach, providing an example to aid the agent in learning the desired output style and generating CoT based on user input. Importantly, we intentionally do not disclose the specific implementation details of the code to the agent, which encourages the agent to generate diverse CoTs, as code implementation can vary widely. 

- **A3 Consistency Checker** . This agent examines the consistency between the CoT instructions generated by Agent 2 and the code snippets. It removes code snippets with inconsistencies, ensuring that the CoT instructions accurately reflect the code’s behavior. 

Give you a code snippet, determine its educational value for a student whose goal is to learn basic coding concepts. 

If it has educational value, return only “Yes”, else return “No”. 

Given a piece of code and a chain of thought, determine whether they express exactly the same functional semantics. 

If consistent, return only “Yes”, else return “No”. 

### Given a piece of code, output the corresponding implementation idea. ### Example: 

Input: from typing import List def below_zero(operations: List[int]) ->bool: “““ You’re given a list of deposit and withdrawal operations on a bank account that starts with zero balance. Your task is to detect if at any point the balance of account falls below zero, and at that point function should return True. Otherwise it should return False. ””” 

Output: How to solve: Step 1. Initialize account balance as 0. Step 2. Iterate through operations. -add value to account balance. 

-If account balance <0, return True. Step 3. Return False. ### Input: [ _X_ ] ### Output: [ _Y_ ] 

> 8https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3-5 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

2442 

## _B. Model Training_ 

To enable the training of _ℓ_ LMs with limited resources, researchers have explored parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods since full parameter fine-tuning is impractical in this scenario. As demonstrated in the previous study [36], these methods have been proven to achieve high performance by providing sufficient instructions to the language models. In contrast to continuous-based soft prompt methods [37], [38], our approach employs a set of discrete tokens as instruction prompts, which are meaningful and easily interpretable. For our CoT generation task, we design a template that incorporates task-specific instructions, which is illustrated as follows. 

The generated CoT by COTTON serves as an additional piece of information that is added to the original prompt in code generation tasks. In practical scenarios, to improve the user experience, we recommend generating CoT only when the code generation model fails to generate the correct code. This approach ensures that the CoT is used when necessary to avoid unnecessary overhead. 

## IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

To evaluate the effectiveness and benefits of our proposed approach, we mainly design the following three research questions (RQs): 

**RQ1: Can** _ℓ_ **LMs generate high-quality CoT independently?** 

### Given a piece of code, output the corresponding implementation idea. ### Input: [ _X_ ] ### Output: [ _Y_ ] 

In this RQ, we want to investigate whether _ℓ_ LMs have the capability to generate high-quality CoTs independently (i.e., the first question mentioned in Section I). A negative finding of this RQ can constitute the motivation for designing our approach COTTON. 

**RQ2: Can COTTON generate higher-quality CoTs?** 

To address the challenge of excessive parameters in the base model, we employ the LoRA method [24] to facilitate efficient fine-tuning with limited resources. Unlike traditional finetuning methods that update all weights of the model, LoRA introduces trainable low-rank matrices to approximate weight adjustments. This approach leverages the observation that the adaptation process inherently exhibits a low “intrinsic rank.” Let **_W_** 0 _∈_ R<sup>_d×k_</sup> denote the pre-trained matrix. The weight adjustment approximation from **_W_** 0 to **_W_** 0 + Δ **_W_** using LoRA can be expressed as: 



Here, **_B_** _∈_ R<sup>_d×r_</sup> and **_A_** _∈_ R<sup>_r×k_</sup> , where _r ≪_ min( _d, k_ ) represents the rank. During the fine-tuning process, **_W_** 0 remains unchanged, while **_B_** and **_A_** become the trainable parameters. Given an input **_X_** and its associated original output **_H_** , the adjusted output **_H_**<sup>¯</sup> is computed as: 

In this RQ, we want to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach COTTON. Specifically, we aim to compare its performance against state-of-the-art base models. Since we are the first to study automated CoT generation for code generation, we select relevant base models from similar research topics. We employ automatic evaluation metrics to assess the quality of the generated CoTs from various perspectives. We also conduct a human evaluation to assess the effectiveness of our approach, since automatic metrics may not fully capture the semantic similarity and educational value of the generated CoTs. 

**RQ3: Can** _ℓ_ **LMs effectively benefit from CoT?** 

While _ℓ_ LMs may not be able to generate high-quality CoTs independently, they may benefit from the provided CoTs to improve code generation performance (i.e., the second question mentioned in Section I.). In this RQ, we want to validate the effectiveness of leveraging CoT for _ℓ_ LMs. 

## _A. Dataset_ 

## ¯ **_H_** = **_W_** 0 **_X_** + Δ **_W X_** = **_H_** + **_BAX_** 

To initialize the matrices, Matrix **_A_** is initialized by random Gaussian values, while **_B_** is initialized by zeros. This ensures that the initial value of Δ **_W_** = **_BA_** is zero at the start of training. To increase the number of trainable parameters and improve the capabilities, we apply LoRA to adapt all linear layers simultaneously. 

## _C. Model Inference_ 

In the inference phase, the model trained by COTTON can be efficiently deployed on a single consumer graphics card to generate CoT. Note that COTTON is a stand-alone tool and its deployment does not require the use of LLM. To accelerate the decoding process, COTTON utilizes the Greedy Search algorithm, which, in a nutshell, selects the token with the highest probability at each decoding step, resulting in a more deterministic output during inference. 

_1) Code Generation:_ To evaluate the performance of _ℓ_ LMs with and without CoT in the zero-shot scenario, we conduct experiments on three code generation datasets. 

**HumanEval/HumanEval-plus.** The HumanEval dataset [25] was developed and published by OpenAI, consisting of 164 Python programming problems. Each problem includes an average of 7.8 test cases. which can provide a comprehensive evaluation of code generation capabilities. The HumanEval-plus dataset [4] aims to alleviate the test case coverage limitation in HumanEval, which may result in false positive rates. Note that HumanEval and HumanEval-plus are only different in terms of test cases and not in terms of CoT generation tasks. 

**OpenEval.** To ensure fairness and generalizability, we collect a new code generation dataset OpenEval. This dataset includes 178 problems selected from the competition-level code translation dataset AVATAR [39]. For each problem, we designed additional test cases in a manual way that can effectively evaluate the quality of the generated code and minimize bias and 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

2443 



Fig. 3. An example in our used datasets. 

TABLE I 

STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF OUR DATASETS 

|**Type**|**Train**|**Valid**|**HumanEval-CoT**|**OpenEval-CoT**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Count|9,000|264|164|178|
|Avg in Prompt|63.76|61.32|80.09|79.39|
|Median in Prompt|41.00|39.50|64.50|64.50|
|_≤_256 in Prompt|98.03%|98.11%|98.78%|99.44%|
|Avg in CoT|85.40|82.41|94.54|93.99|
|Median in CoT|74.00|74.50|86.00|85.00|
|_≤_256 in CoT|99.07%|99.24%|99.39%|99.44%|



leakage. Particularly, we hired two software engineers with 2 _∼_ 3 years of development experience each to construct 5 test cases for each code segment to ensure the diversity of test cases. 

_2) CoT Generation:_ Following the method in Section III-A, we collect a total of 9,264 CoT-generated samples. These samples are randomly split into a training set of 9,000 samples and a validation set of 264 samples. To evaluate the performance of COTTON, we generate CoTs on the HumanEval and OpenEval datasets, using the same methodology described in Section III-A. The derived datasets are HumanEval-CoT and OpenEval-CoT respectively. Furthermore, we utilize Agent 2 (cf. Section III-A) as the Teacher Model. An example in our used datasets is shown in Fig. 3. Finally, Table I provides statistical information about the datasets used for our evaluation. 

## _B. Code Generation Models_ 

Based on the performance evaluations conducted by Gunasekar et al. [33], we select the following state-of-the-art _ℓ_ LMs for our experiments: CodeGen [19], StarCoder [40], and CodeT5+ [41]. These models have demonstrated promising performance in various code generation tasks [42]. 

**CodeGen.** CodeGen [19] is an open-source large language model specifically designed for code generation, with a particular focus on multi-turn program synthesis. It enhances program synthesis by breaking down complex user intents into multiple steps, facilitating the model’s understanding. For our experiments, we select three models of different parameter sizes: 350M, 2B, and 6B. 

**StarCoder.** StarCoder [40] is a language model trained on a diverse corpus of source code and natural language text. Its training data covers over 80 programming languages and includes text extracted from GitHub issues, commits, and notebooks. 

We select three models of different parameter sizes: 1B, 3B, and 7B. 

**CodeT5+.** CodeT5+ [41] is a code large language model with an encoder-decoder architecture, capable of performing various code understanding and generation tasks. It offers flexibility by supporting different modes of operation. In our experiments, we select four models of different parameter sizes: 220M, 770M, 2B, and 6B. 

## _C. Evaluation Metrics_ 

_1) Code Generation:_ To evaluate the performances of code generation models, we employ the Pass@1 metric and CoTPass@1 metric. 

**Pass@1.** The Pass@1 metric measures the percentage of generated code snippets that pass the corresponding test cases without considering the CoT. This metric evaluates the ability of the code generation model to generate functionally correct code. 

**CoT-Pass@1.** When the code generated by the model without the guidance of the CoT fails to pass the corresponding test cases, the model is provided with the CoT guidance to generate code. The CoT-Pass@1 metric is used to measure the percentage of generated code snippets that successfully pass the test cases after considering the CoT. This metric specifically evaluates the model’s capability to generate code that passes the test cases when guided by the CoT. It focuses on assessing the model’s ability to improve its code generation performance by incorporating the guidance provided by the CoT in cases where the initial code generation without CoT fails to pass the test cases. 

_2) CoT Generation:_ To evaluate the performance of the CoTs generated by COTTON, we first employ four automatic evaluation metrics commonly used in similar generation tasks (such as code generation [43], [44], code summarization [45], [46], and code translation [47] tasks). 

**BLEU** (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy) [48] is a machine translation metric that measures the lexical similarity between two texts by computing the overlap of _n_ -grams. In our evaluation, we utilize BLEU-1, -2, -3, -4 to evaluate the quality of the generated CoTs. 

**METEOR** (Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering) [49] is an enhanced automatic evaluation metric based on BLEU. It incorporates an alignment algorithm based on dictionaries and linguistic knowledge, placing greater emphasis on word order and grammatical structure matching. **ROUGE-L** (Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation)-L [50] measures the similarity between the generated CoT and the ground-truth CoT by comparing their longest common subsequence. This metric is advantageous for handling long sequences and is not limited to single vocabulary items. 

**Consistency** To further automatically assess the semantic correctness of the generated CoT, we use Agent 3 (cf. Section III-A) to examine the consistency between the CoT and the code snippets. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

2444 

TABLE II 

HYPER-PARAMETERS AND THEIR VALUES 

|Hyper-Parameter|Value|Hyper-Parameter|Value|
|---|---|---|---|
|Optimizer|AdamW|Random Seed|42|
|Learning Rate|1e-4|Training batch size|1|
|Lora R|8|Lora alpha|16|
|Max input length|256|Max output length|256|
|Epoch|20|Early Stop|5|



The values of these performance metrics range from 0 to 1 and are displayed as percentages. A higher value indicates a closer match between the generated CoT and the ground-truth CoT. To compute BLEU, METEOR, and ROUGE-L, we utilize the nlg-eval library.<sup>9</sup> 

## _D. Implementation Details and Running Platform_ 

The hyper-parameters are tuned according to actual performance. We show the values of these hyper-parameters in Table II. For the implementation of COTTON and other base models, we utilize the PyTorch<sup>10</sup> and Transformers<sup>11</sup> libraries. 

Our implementation is based on PyTorch 1.8, and the experiments are conducted on a machine with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4210 CPU and the GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. It took about 6 hours to complete the model training of COTTON. 

## V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT ANALYSIS 

## _A. RQ1: Can ℓLMs Generate High-Quality CoTs Independently?_ 

To investigate whether _ℓ_ LMs can independently generate high-quality CoTs for code generation, we conduct experiments based on few-shot prompt learning techniques as described in Section III-A. We evaluate the performance of _ℓ_ LMs with model sizes ranging from 0.35B to 7B, the base model CodeLlama, and several representative LLMs (such as InternLM 123B [51], ChatGLM 130B [26], Gemini [52], gpt-3.5-turbo, and gpt-4 [53]). Among these LLMs, Gemini, gpt-3.5-turbo, and gpt-4 are currently considered to be the most promising LLMs in code generation tasks and have shown promising performance. 

Table III presents the performance of _ℓ_ LMs and LLMs across all evaluation metrics on the HumanEval-CoT and OpenEvalCoT datasets. In terms of lexical similarity, _ℓ_ LMs generally performed worse than LLMs. For example, using the **METEOR** metric, LLMs like gpt-4 can achieve scores around 0.35 on the HumanEval-CoT dataset and around 0.37 on the OpenEvalCoT dataset. In contrast, the majority of _ℓ_ LMs scored below 0.3 on both datasets. In terms of semantic perspective, most _ℓ_ LMs are difficult to generate high-quality CoTs, while LLMs demonstrated better performance. For example, based on the **Consistency** metric, gpt-4 can achieve scores above 0.96 on the HumanEval-CoT dataset and above 0.87 on the OpenEvalCoT dataset. In contrast, the majority of _ℓ_ LMs scored below 

- 9https://github.com/Maluuba/nlg-eval 

> 10https://pytorch.org/ 

> 11https://github.com/huggingface/transformers 

0.6 in both data sets. In addition, in terms of the Consistency metric, gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4 achieved the best results on the OpenEval and HumanEval datasets, respectively, yet the cost of calling gpt-4 is 20 times higher than that of gpt-3.5-turbo. Therefore, we choose gpt-3.5-turbo as the Teacher Model in our study. 

By further analysis based on varying models and parameter sizes, we can achieve interesting insights. Among CodeGen, StarCoder, CodeT5+, and CodeLlama models, StarCoder and CodeLlama showed potential in generating high-quality CoTs for guiding code generation. This could be attributed to the pre-training dataset of StarCoder and CodeLlama. The pretraining dataset of StarCoder includes information from GitHub commits and issues while the pre-training dataset of CodeLlama includes information from contains 8% of code-related natural language samples and 7% of general-purpose natural language data. The additional sources of natural language information may contribute to a better code understanding, resulting in higher-quality CoTs. In contrast, the encoder-decoder model CodeT5+ exhibited the lowest performance compared to the decoder-only models (i.e., CodeGen and StarCoder). This performance difference may be attributed to the model’s architecture. In the few-shot scenario, the encoder-decoder model may perform worse than the decoder model on the CoT generation task. 

Regarding parameter scale, only the StarCoder model exhibited a positive correlation between larger parameter scale and better performance. The performance of the CodeGen and CodeT5+ models did not strictly align with the scale of parameters. Only the 2B version of these models demonstrated improved performance. 

The majority of _ℓ_ LMs face challenges in generating high-quality CoTs for guiding code generation independently. 

## _B. RQ2: Can COTTON Generate Higher-Quality CoTs_ 

We treat the CoT generation as a text generation problem (i.e., convert a user’s functional requirements into CoT). To provide a comprehensive evaluation, we compare nine commonly used baselines, including CodeBERT [54], GraphCodeBERT [55], CodeGPT [56], CodeGPT-adapter [56], PLBART [57], CodeT5 [58], NatGen [59], Llama2 [28], and CodeGeeX2 [60]. To ensure a fair comparison, we perform full parameter finetuning for models with less than 1B parameters. For models with more than 1B parameters, we employ LoRA [24] for parameter-efficient fine-tuning. 

- **CodeBERT** . CodeBERT [54] is a pre-trained encoderonly model that can handle multi-modal inputs, such as natural language descriptions of code or code comments. It combines these inputs with code snippets to generate more accurate and complete representations of code. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2445 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

### TABLE III 

PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF _ℓ_ LMS AND LLMS TO INDEPENDENTLY GENERATE COTS ON THE HUMANEVAL-COT AND OPENEVAL-COT DATASETS 

|**Corpus**|**Type**|**Model**|**Model Size**|**BLEU-1**|**BLEU-2**|**BLEU-3**|**BLEU-4**|**Meteor**|**Rouge-L**|**Consistency**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||CodeGen|350M|16.39|11.68|8.79|6.86|13.08|23.56|0.61|
|||CodeGen|2B|40.34|30.90|24.16|19.25|23.60|37.95|39.02|
|||CodeGen|6B|27.48|20.33|15.54|12.19|18.95|31.37|28.66|
|||StarCoder|1B|38.80|29.79|23.18|18.33|24.46|38.83|31.71|
|||StarCoder|3B|42.13|32.16|25.04|19.97|25.11|40.53|60.96|
|||StarCoder|7B|43.53|34.20|27.16|22.02|26.58|43.76|78.66|
|HumanEval-CoT|_ℓ_LM|CodeT5+|220M|9.37|5.88|4.18|3.13|5.79|8.33|0.61|
|||CodeT5+|770M|22.25|16.28|12.33|9.51|17.76|24.73|0.61|
|||CodeT5+|2B|35.77|27.89|22.09|17.77|22.55|35.17|27.44|
|||CodeT5+|6B|19.37|13.18|9.56|7.28|14.05|22.99|7.32|
|||CodeLlama|7B|44.88|36.13|29.10|23.80|27.34|43.49|82.32|
|||InternLM|123B|52.08|42.23|34.50|28.67|32.65|43.09|89.63|
|||ChatGLM|130B|53.28|43.28|35.52|29.64|32.61|43.03|86.59|
||LLM|Gemini|Not-Available|52.50|43.56|36.43|30.92|32.14|53.28|91.46|
|||gpt-4|Not-Available|**60.14**|**50.49**|**43.03**|**37.24**|**34.55**|**54.32**|**96.95**|
|||Teacher(gpt-3.5-turbo)|Not-Available|-|-|-|-|-|-|93.29|
|||CodeGen|350M|31.74|25.32|21.11|17.96|17.62|29.29|0.56|
|||CodeGen|2B|39.22|31.21|25.22|20.73|24.27|37.43|29.78|
|||CodeGen|6B|32.54|25.84|20.92|17.21|20.79|33.15|27.53|
|||StarCoder|1B|41.33|32.09|25.32|20.44|24.67|35.98|21.35|
|||StarCoder|3B|44.85|35.90|29.17|24.21|26.45|38.74|43.26|
||_ℓ_LM|StarCoder|7B|46.23|36.98|30.07|24.88|28.35|43.33|57.87|
|OpenEval-CoT||CodeT5+|220M|14.70|9.98|7.88|6.59|9.13|10.56|0.00|
|||CodeT5+|770M|29.35|22.95|18.11|14.52|19.96|28.59|0.00|
|||CodeT5+|2B|29.96|24.07|19.61|16.27|21.31|32.27|21.91|
|||CodeT5+|6B|26.58|21.00|17.20|14.42|17.13|28.12|5.06|
|||CodeLlama|7B|52.09|43.89|37.27|32.13|30.52|48.96|71.91|
|||InternLM|123B|55.59|46.77|40.01|34.80|35.28|46.48|84.27|
|||ChatGLM|130B|55.28|46.47|39.68|34.56|35.14|45.64|76.40|
||LLM|Gemini|Not-Available|57.49|49.04|42.43|37.25|34.13|54.88|81.46|
|||gpt-4|Not-Available|**62.54**|**54.34**|**47.88**|**42.81**|**36.84**|**58.02**|87.64|
|||Teacher(gpt-3.5-turbo)|Not-Available|-|-|-|-|-|-|**89.33**|



- **GraphCodeBERT** . GraphCodeBERT [55] is an extension of CodeBERT specifically designed to capture more fine-grained information about code structures and dependencies. It enhances the capabilities of CodeBERT by incorporating graph-based representations. 

- **CodeGPT** . CodeGPT [56] is a pre-trained decoder-only model employing a 12-layer Transformer Decoder architecture. It is trained with the same structure as GPT-2. 

- **CodeGPT-adapter.** CodeGPT-adapter [56] is an extension of CodeGPT that utilizes domain-adaptive learning. It is initialized with a pre-trained GPT-2 model and then continues pretraining on the code dataset. 

- **PLBART.** PLBART [57] is a sequence-to-sequence model pre-trained on a large collection of Java and Python functions and natural language descriptions via denoising autoencoding. 

- **CodeT5.** CodeT5 [58] is a unified pre-trained encoderdecoder Transformer model that considers token type information in code and better leverages the code semantics conveyed from developer-assigned identifiers. 

- **NatGen.** NatGen [59] is an extension of CodeT5 that exploits the bimodal and dual-channel nature of code information to learn the naturalizing of source code. 

- **CodeGeeX2.** CodeGeeX2 [60] is a multilingual code generation model, which is based on the ChatGLM2 architecture. 

- **Llama2.** Llama2 [28] is an extension of Llama. Building on Llama, Llama2 increases the size of the pre-trained 

corpus by 40%, doubles the context length of the model, and employs a grouped query attention mechanism. 

_1) Automatic Evaluation:_ We first evaluate different base models on the HumanEval-CoT and OpenEval-CoT datasets. We consider different evaluation metrics, including BLEU-1, BLEU-2, BLEU-3, BLEU-4, Meteor, Rouge-L, and Consistency. The results are shown in Table IV. 

For the HumanEval-CoT dataset, COTTON consistently outperformed the other base models across various evaluation metrics. This indicates that COTTON generates CoTs with higher lexical similarity compared to the base models. For example, based on the **METEOR** metric, COTTON achieved a score of 0.38, while the other base models scored between 0.27 and 0.37. In terms of semantic similarity, COTTON also outperformed the other base models on the HumanEval-CoT dataset. With a score of 0.93, COTTON demonstrated a higher level of semantic similarity to the actual code compared to the scores ranging from 0.29 to 0.92 achieved by the other base models. Importantly, COTTON even outperforms larger LLMs (i.e., InternLM 123B, ChatGLM 130B, and Gemini), indicating its effectiveness in generating high-quality CoTs. We can find similar trends on the OpenEval-CoT dataset in Table IV, where COTTON achieves better performance compared to the other base models. 

Furthermore, we observe a correlation between the parameter scale of the models and the performance of the generated CoTs. Specifically, larger models (such as CodeGeeX2, Llama2, and CodeCoT) showed significant performance improvement in 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

2446 

TABLE IV 

PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT BASE MODELS TO GENERATE COTS ON THE HUMANEVAL-COT AND OPENEVAL-COT DATASETS (HERE COTTON IS BASED ON CODELLAMA-7B) 

|**Corpus**|**Base Model**|**Model Size**|**BLEU-1**|**BLEU-2**|**BLEU-3**|**BLEU-4**|**Meteor**|**Rouge-L**|**Consistency**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||CodeBERT|173M|46.35|38.79|33.10|28.81|27.52|50.66|29.27|
||GraphCodeBERT|173M|47.32|39.75|34.17|30.08|27.91|50.68|33.54|
||CodeGPT|124M|26.91|47.96|41.14|36.13|31.91|52.95|57.32|
||CodeGPT-adapter|124M|54.10|45.19|38.42|33.40|30.56|51.04|52.44|
||PLBART|139M|42.95|35.07|29.13|24.81|24.25|33.85|21.34|
||CodeT5|223M|61.03|53.16|46.85|42.00|34.89|58.93|79.88|
|HumanEval-CoT|NatGen|223M|62.76|54.84|48.50|43.59|35.92|59.91|82.32|
||CodeGeeX2|6B|62.57|54.18|47.54|42.33|35.77|59.72|92.68|
||LLama2|7B|**66.56**|58.00|51.05|45.62|37.65|61.39|89.63|
||COTTON|7B|65.97|**58.21**|**51.89**|**46.87**|**38.22**|**63.38**|**93.29**|
||CodeBERT|173M|34.19|27.18|21.98|18.14|23.02|41.20|8.99|
||GraphCodeBERT|173M|37.87|30.09|24.42|20.27|23.73|42.23|11.24|
||CodeGPT|124M|48.70|40.20|33.58|28.62|28.23|46.19|35.96|
||CodeGPT-adapter|124M|49.91|41.41|34.76|29.64|28.99|46.90|42.13|
||PLBART|139M|45.54|37.19|30.90|26.23|25.48|34.73|17.98|
|OElCT|CodeT5|223M|57.65|50.18|44.29|39.63|33.81|55.84|65.17|
|penva-o|NatGen|223M|60.25|52.75|46.87|42.19|35.19|57.86|58.99|
||CodeGeeX2|6B|64.86|56.83|50.54|45.62|37.05|61.31|79.21|
||LLama2|7B|64.89|56.98|50.67|45.54|37.24|60.40|71.91|
||COTTON|7B|**67.04**|**59.56**|**53.60**|**48.80**|**38.80**|**62.92**|**83.71**|



CoT generation compared to the other models. The larger parameter scales of these models enabled them to capture more complex patterns and dependencies in the data, leading to better CoT generation ability. 

_2) Human Evaluation:_ Although automatic evaluation metrics can offer valuable insights into the quality of generated CoTs, these metrics mainly concentrate on overlap or semantic similarity with the CoTs generated by the Teacher Model, possibly overlooking whether the generated CoT is indeed inspiring or offers meaningful guidance to developers. Furthermore, the enhancements in Table IV brought about by COTTON over CodeGeeX2 and LLama2 may not be immediately apparent. 

To further evaluate the quality of the generated CoTs, we conducted a human study using four groups of CoTs generated by different base models (CodeGeeX2 and LLama2) that performed similarly based on the results in Tables III and IV. By involving human evaluators, we aimed to obtain a more comprehensive assessment of the CoTs and gain a deeper understanding of their practical implications. 

In our human study, we adopted the methodology used in previous studies [61], [62], [63]. The quality of the generated CoTs was evaluated based on three aspects, as illustrated in Fig. 4: 

- **Similarity** . This aspect measures the semantic similarity between the generated CoT and the reference. 

- **Naturalness** . This aspect assessed the grammaticality and fluency of the generated CoT. 

• **Educational Value** . This aspect evaluated whether volunteers could gain inspiration from the generated CoTs to solve problems, thereby measuring their educational value. For the human evaluation, we recruited six assessors (six postgraduate students) who were familiar with Python programming language. We selected all samples from the HumanEvalCoT dataset (164 samples) and the OpenEval-CoT dataset (178 samples) as the evaluation subjects. For each sample, we collected the ground truth CoT and three generated CoTs. 



Fig. 4. A sample questionnaire used in human study. 

To ensure a thorough evaluation, we divided all the samples into three groups, with each group containing 114 samples. Each group was evaluated anonymously by two assessors in terms of similarity, naturalness, and educational value. The score for each aspect ranges from 0 to 4, with higher scores 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

2447 

TABLE V 

THE AVERAGE SCORE AND STANDARD DEVIATION (IN PARENTHESES) OF HUMAN STUDY 

||**Aspect**|**LLama2**|**CodeGeeX2**|**COTTON**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||Similarity|2.847 (0.875)|2.762 (0.918)|**3.038** (0.743)|
|HE|Naturalness|3.418 (0.842)|3.375 (0.592)|**3.442** (0.713)|
||Educational Value|2.985 (0.788)|2.973 (0.812)|**3.102** (0.779)|
||Similarity|3.024 (0.645)|2.976 (0.615)|**3.128** (0.734)|
|OE|Naturalness|3.521 (0.746)|3.567 (0.789)|**3.691** (0.657)|
||Educational Value|2.955 (0.858)|3.002 (0.876)|**3.209** (0.891)|



COTTON consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art base models in generating CoTs in terms of lexical and semantic similarity, as well as its ability to provide valuable guidance and inspiration to developers. 

## _C. RQ3: Can ℓLMs Benefit From the Generated CoT?_ 

TABLE VI 

THE P-VALUES BETWEEN THREE ASPECTS OF THE HUMAN STUDY, AND ALL THE P-VALUES ARE SUBSTANTIALLY SMALLER THAN 0.005 

||**Model**|**Similarity**|**Similarity**|**Educational Value**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|HE|Llama2|2.14e-5|1.85e-5|4.23e-5|
||CodeGeeX2|5.68e-5|3.62e-5|1.45e-5|
|OE|Llama2|1.53e-4|4.28e-4|8.85e-4|
||CodeGeeX2|1.68e-4|4.29e-4|3.67e-4|



indicating higher quality and the final score is the average of two assessors’ scores. 

A sample questionnaire is shown in Fig. 4. To guarantee human study quality, the generated CoTs were presented in a random order, ensuring that the assessors had no knowledge of which approach generated the CoT. Moreover, the assessors were allowed to use the internet to look up any related concepts they were unfamiliar with. Finally, we limited each assessor to evaluate only 20 samples in half a day. This was done to prevent fatigue and maintain a high level of concentration during the evaluation process. 

The results of the human study are summarized in Table V, which shows the average scores and standard deviations of all evaluated samples by the assessors. We can observe that the proposed approach COTTON outperforms Llama2 and CodeGeeX2 in terms of similarity, naturalness, and educational value. To determine the statistical significance of these differences, we conducted Fisher’s exact test [64] and observed a statistically significant disparity in Table VI (i.e., _p_ -value _<_ 0 _._ 05). Furthermore, we utilized Fleiss Kappa [65] to assess the agreement among the six assessors. The overall Kappa value based on the comparison results is 0.7, signifying substantial agreement among the assessors. 

These findings provide further evidence of the effectiveness of COTTON in generating high-quality CoTs for guiding code generation. The higher average score values obtained by COTTON indicate that it is capable of generating CoTs that are more grammatically correct, fluent, and valuable in terms of providing guidance and inspiration to developers. These results highlight the competitiveness of our proposed approach in generating CoTs that are not only grammatically sound but also valuable from an educational perspective. 

_1) Effect of Self-Generated CoTs on ℓLMs:_ To assess the impact of generated CoTs on improving the code generation performance of LLMs (such as CodeGen, StarCoder, and CodeT5+ as discussed in Section IV-B), we initially compare different models in the Self-CoT scenario (i.e., the CoTs generated by the model itself using the few-shot method in **RQ1** ). Furthermore, since Self-planning [13] and SCoT [14] have demonstrated that well-designed self-CoT prompts can effectively improve the performance of large models in code generation, we also include Think step-by-step [18], Self-planning [13], and SCoT [14] as baselines in our experiments. 

We use the Pass@1 metric to evaluate the effectiveness of using CoTs in improving the performance of _ℓ_ LMs, which can help understand whether _ℓ_ LMs can effectively benefit from the instructions provided by CoT. The results are presented in Table VII, with the best result highlighted in boldface and the second-best result underscored. We can observe that, under the guidance of the CoT generated by the Self-CoT method, the performance improvement of all _ℓ_ LMs is very limited, and even the performance of some _ℓ_ LMs may decrease. This finding supports the conclusion of **RQ1** , i.e., _ℓ_ LMs cannot independently generate high-quality CoTs. 

_2) Effect of CoTs Generated by Different LMs on ℓLMs:_ We analyze the performance of _ℓ_ LMs when utilizing CoTs generated by CodeLlama, ChatGLM 130B, Gemini, and the Teacher model. Specifically, we compare the utility of CoTs generated by CodeLlama and the selected LLMs with those generated by COTTON to determine whether COTTON-generated CoTs are more beneficial for _ℓ_ LMs. The results are presented in Table VIII, with the best result highlighted in boldface and the second-best result underscored. 

Our findings indicate that all _ℓ_ LMs can effectively leverage the guidance provided by CoTs to enhance the quality of generated code, assuming the CoTs’ quality is ensured. This emphasizes the potential of utilizing CoTs to improve the performance of _ℓ_ LMs. 

Furthermore, we examine the disparity between CoTs generated by COTTON and those generated by the Teacher model. This comparison sheds light on how closely COTTON can approximate the more advanced Teacher model in CoT generation. The experimental results reveal that COTTON outperforms ChatGLM 130B and closely rivals Gemini and GPT-3.5-turbo in the CoT generation task for code generation. 

_3) Effect of CoTs Generated by Different Base Models on ℓLMs:_ In our work, essentially we fine-tune a base 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

2448 

### TABLE VII 

THE PERFORMANCE OF CODE GENERATION MODELS WITH OR WITHOUT THE COTS GENERATED BY DIFFERENT SELF SOT PROMPT METHODS ON THE HUMANEVAL(HE), HUMANEVAL-PLUS(HE-P), AND OPENEVAL(OE) DATASETS 

|**Corus**|**Model**|**Pass@1**|**CoT**|**-Pass@1** (Different C|oT Generation Metho|ds)||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**p**|||Self-CoT|Think Step by Step|Self-Planning|SCoT|COTTON|
||CodeGen 350M|14.63|12.80|15.85 (_↑_8.34%)|18.29<br>(_↑_25.02%)|15.85 (_↑_8.34%)|**20.73** (_↑_41.70%)|
||CodeGen 2B|25.61|25.00|27.44<br>(_↑_7.15%)|26.22 (_↑_2.38%)|26.83 (_↑_4.76%)|**34.76** (_↑_35.73%)|
||CodeGen 6B|27.44|31.10<br>(_↑_13.34%)|29.88 (_↑_8.89%)|28.66 (_↑_4.45%)|30.49 (_↑_11.12%)|**39.63** (_↑_44.42%)|
||StarCoder 1B|12.80|12.80|15.85 (_↑_23.83%)|17.68<br>(_↑_38.13%)|14.63 (_↑_14.30%)|**25.00** (_↑_95.31%)|
|HE|StarCoder 3B|17.07|21.34<br>(_↑_25.01%)|17.07|20.12 (_↑_17.87%)|20.12 (_↑_17.87%)|**30.49** (_↑_78.62%)|
||StarCoder 7B|21.95|29.88<br>(_↑_36.13%)|28.05 (_↑_27.79%)|25.61 (_↑_16.67%)|29.88<br>(_↑_36.13%)|**37.20** (_↑_69.48%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|12.20|14.02<br>(_↑_14.92%)|14.02<br>(_↑_14.92%)|12.20|11.59|**18.90** (_↑_54.92%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|17.07|17.68 (_↑_3.57%)|17.68 (_↑_3.57%)|17.68 (_↑_3.57%)|18.90<br>(_↑_10.72%)|**26.83** (_↑_57.18%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|23.78|25.00 (_↑_5.13%)|27.44<br>(_↑_15.39%)|26.22 (_↑_10.26%)|26.22 (_↑_10.26%)|**30.49** (_↑_28.22%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|26.22|32.32 (_↑_23.26%)|33.54 (_↑_27.92%)|34.15<br>(_↑_30.24%)|32.93 (_↑_25.59%)|**42.68** (_↑_62.78%)|
||CodeGen 350M|7.30|8.99 (_↑_23.15%)|8.43 (_↑_15.48%)|7.87 (_↑_7.81%)|10.67<br>(_↑_46.16%)|**12.92** (_↑_76.99%)|
||CodeGen 2B|16.85|19.10 (_↑_13.35%)|16.85|20.22<br>(_↑_20.00%)|20.22<br>(_↑_20.00%)|**26.97** (_↑_60.06%)|
||CodeGen 6B|21.91|23.60 (_↑_7.71%)|23.60 (_↑_7.71%)|28.09 (_↑_28.21%)|29.78<br>(_↑_35.92%)|**33.71** (_↑_53.86%)|
||StarCoder 1B|8.99|10.67 (_↑_18.69%)|8.99|11.24 (_↑_25.03%)|11.80<br>(_↑_31.26%)|**17.42** (_↑_93.77%)|
|OE|StarCoder 3B|11.24|16.85<br>(_↑_49.91%)|14.61 (_↑_29.98%)|**19.10** (_↑_69.93%)|14.61 (_↑_29.98%)|**19.10** (_↑_69.93%)|
||StarCoder 7B|23.03|29.21<br>(_↑_26.83%)|28.65 (_↑_24.40%)|25.84 (_↑_12.20%)|28.09 (_↑_21.97%)|**33.15** (_↑_43.94%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|7.87|10.67 (_↑_35.58%)|12.36<br>(_↑_57.05%)|10.67 (_↑_35.58%)|8.43 (_↑_7.12%)|**13.48** (_↑_71.28%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|9.55|11.24 (_↑_17.70%)|13.48<br>(_↑_41.15%)|13.48<br>(_↑_41.15%)|13.48<br>(_↑_41.15%)|**16.29** (_↑_70.58%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|15.17|19.66<br>(_↑_29.60%)|16.85 (_↑_11.07%)|19.66<br>(_↑_29.60%)|17.42 (_↑_14.83%)|**28.65** (_↑_88.86%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|20.22|21.35 (_↑_5.59%)|30.90 (_↑_52.82%)|24.72 (_↑_22.26%)|31.46<br>(_↑_55.59%)|**35.39** (_↑_75.02%)|
||CodeGen 350M|15.24|12.80|16.46 (_↑_8.01%)|18.29<br>(_↑_20.01%)|15.85 (_↑_4.00%)|**20.73** (_↑_36.02%)|
||CodeGen 2B|26.22|25.00|27.44<br>(_↑_4.65%)|26.22|26.83 (_↑_2.33%)|**35.37** (_↑_34.90%)|
||CodeGen 6B|27.44|32.32<br>(_↑_17.78%)|30.49 (_↑_11.12%)|29.27 (_↑_6.67%)|30.49 (_↑_11.12%)|**40.85** (_↑_48.87%)|
||StarCoder 1B|13.41|13.41|15.85 (_↑_18.20%)|17.68<br>(_↑_31.84%)|14.63 (_↑_9.10%)|**26.22** (_↑_95.53%)|
||StarCoder 3B|17.07|21.95<br>(_↑_28.59%)|17.07|20.12 (_↑_17.87%)|20.73 (_↑_21.44%)|**31.71** (_↑_85.76%)|
|HE-p|StarCoder 7B|22.56|30.49 (_↑_35.15%)|28.66 (_↑_27.04%)|25.61 (_↑_13.52%)|31.10<br>(_↑_37.85%)|**38.41** (_↑_70.26%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|12.20|14.02<br>(_↑_14.92%)|14.02<br>(_↑_14.92%)|12.20|11.59|**19.51** (_↑_59.92%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|17.68|17.68|17.68|17.68|19.51<br>(_↑_10.35%)|**27.44** (_↑_55.20%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|25.00|25.00|28.05<br>(_↑_12.20%)|27.44 (_↑_9.76%)|26.22 (_↑_4.88%)|**31.71** (_↑_26.84%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|26.83|32.93 (_↑_22.74%)|34.15<br>(_↑_27.28%)|34.76 (_↑_26.56%)|32.93 (_↑_22.74%)|**43.90** (_↑_63.62%)|



model CodeLlama to obtain COTTON. A legitimate question is why we choose CodeLlama, or whether other base models could yield better results. To further investigate this question, we take different base _ℓ_ LM models to tune them for CoT generation purposes. We then conduct experiments using the generated CoTs, where the results are presented in Table IX, with the best result in boldface and the second-best result underscored. 

Based on the results, it is observed that using CodeLlama as the base model leads to more significant performance improvements in code generation for the majority of _ℓ_ LMs, which justifies our choice and highlights the importance of choosing an appropriate base model when generating CoTs to enhance the code generation performance of _ℓ_ LMs. By selecting the most effective base model, COTTON can optimize the performance and effectiveness of _ℓ_ LMs in generating highquality code. 

_ℓ_ LMs can effectively leverage the guidance provided by CoTs. This emphasizes the potential of utilizing CoTs to enhance the performance of _ℓ_ LMs in code generation tasks. 

## VI. DISCUSSIONS 

## _A. Evaluating COTTON on LLMs_ 

To further evaluate the capabilities of COTTON, we conduct experiments to assess its impact on LLMs, specifically focusing on gpt-3.5-turbo. Our goal is to investigate whether COTTON can enhance the performance of LLMs and to what extent this enhancement is achieved. 

Gpt-3.5-turbo serves as a representative model in code generation and is one of the most state-of-the-art LLMs available. We consider its performance for code generation in zero-shot scenarios and then under the guidance of various COTs, including the CoTs generated by COTTON, the CoTs self-generated by Self-planning [13], SCoT [14], and the Self-CoT method proposed in our study. 

Table X shows the impact of COTTON and other selfgenerated CoT methods on gpt-3.5-turbo. The experimental results show that the gpt-3.5-turbo model demonstrates a significant improvement in code generation performance when guided by various CoTs. When comparing the zero-shot scenarios with the guided code generation, we observe a substantial increase in Pass@1, indicating that the incorporation of CoTs, including those generated by COTTON, positively influences the model’s ability to generate more accurate code. Notably, it even exceeds the performance of the GPT4 zero-shot 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

2449 

TABLE VIII 

THE PERFORMANCE OF CODE GENERATION MODELS WITH OR WITHOUT THE COTS GENERATED BY DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE HUMANEVAL(HE), HUMANEVAL-PLUS(HE-P), AND OPENEVAL(OE) DATASETS (HERE COTTON IS BASED ON CODELLAMA-7B) 

|**Corus**|**Model**|**Pass@1**|**CoT**|**-Pass@1** (Different|CoT Generation Meth|ods)||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**p**|||Gemini|CodeLlama|ChatGLM|Teacher|COTTON|
||CodeGen 350M|14.63|**24.39** (_↑_66.71%)|18.90 (_↑_29.19%)|18.29 (_↑_25.02%)|**24.39** (_↑_66.71%)|20.73<br>(_↑_41.70%)|
||CodeGen 2B|25.61|37.20<br>(_↑_45.26%)|31.10 (_↑_21.44%)|31.71 (_↑_23.82%)|**41.46** (_↑_61.89%)|34.76 (_↑_35.73%)|
||CodeGen 6B|27.44|**43.29** (_↑_57.76%)|36.59 (_↑_33.35%)|31.71 (_↑_15.56%)|**43.29** (_↑_57.76%)|39.63<br>(_↑_44.42%)|
||StarCoder 1B|12.80|21.95 (_↑_71.48%)|17.68 (_↑_38.13%)|17.68 (_↑_38.13%)|**28.66** (_↑_123.91%)|25.00<br>(_↑_95.31%)|
|HE|StarCoder 3B|17.07|34.15<br>(_↑_100.06%)|25.61 (_↑_50.03%)|25.61 (_↑_50.03%)|**39.63** (_↑_132.16%)|30.49 (_↑_78.62%)|
||StarCoder 7B|21.95|38.41<br>(_↑_74.99%)|33.54 (_↑_52.80%)|34.15 (_↑_35.72%)|**41.46** (_↑_88.88%)|37.20 (_↑_69.48%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|12.20|19.51<br>(_↑_59.92%)|18.29 (_↑_49.92%)|16.46 (_↑_34.92%)|**23.17** (_↑_89.92%)|18.90 (_↑_54.92%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|17.07|26.83<br>(_↑_57.18%)|23.78 (_↑_39.31%)|23.78 (_↑_39.31%)|**31.71** (_↑_85.76%)|26.83<br>(_↑_57.18%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|23.78|**38.41** (_↑_61.52%)|28.05 (_↑_17.96%)|29.27 (_↑_23.09%)|**38.41** (_↑_61.52%)|30.49 (_↑_28.22%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|26.22|45.73<br>(_↑_74.41%)|38.41 (_↑_46.69%)|36.59 (_↑_39.55%)|**47.56** (_↑_81.39%)|42.68 (_↑_62.78%)|
||CodeGen 350M|7.30|**16.85** (_↑_13.08%)|14.04 (_↑_92.33%)|12.92 (_↑_76.99%)|15.17<br>(_↑_107.81%)|12.92 (_↑_76.99%)|
||CodeGen 2B|16.85|**30.34** (_↑_80.06%)|21.91 (_↑_30.03%)|25.28 (_↑_50.03%)|29.21<br>(_↑_73.35%)|26.97 (_↑_60.06%)|
||CodeGen 6B|21.91|34.27<br>(_↑_56.41%)|29.21 (_↑_33.32%)|32.02 (_↑_46.14%)|**37.64** (_↑_71.79%)|33.71 (_↑_53.86%)|
||StarCoder 1B|8.99|17.42<br>(_↑_93.77%)|14.61 (_↑_62.51%)|16.85 (_↑_87.43%)|**19.66** (_↑_118.69%)|17.42<br>(_↑_93.77%)|
|OE|StarCoder 3B|11.24|18.54 (_↑_64.95%)|15.17 (_↑_34.96%)|14.61 (_↑_29.98%)|17.98<br>(_↑_59.96%)|**19.10** (_↑_69.93%)|
||StarCoder 7B|23.03|34.83<br>(_↑_51.24%)|28.65 (_↑_24.40%)|29.78 (_↑_29.31%)|**38.20** (_↑_65.87%)|33.15 (_↑_43.94%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|7.87|**15.17** (_↑_92.76%)|10.67 (_↑_35.58%)|12.92 (_↑_64.17%)|14.04<br>(_↑_78.40%)|13.48 (_↑_71.28%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|9.55|**21.35** (_↑_123.56%)|16.85 (_↑_76.44%)|17.98 (_↑_88.27%)|20.22<br>(_↑_111.73%)|16.29 (_↑_70.58%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|15.17|28.65<br>(_↑_88.86%)|24.72 (_↑_62.95%)|25.28 (_↑_66.64%)|**30.90** (_↑_103.69%)|28.65<br>(_↑_88.86%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|20.22|33.15 (_↑_63.95%)|28.09 (_↑_38.92%)|32.02 (_↑_58.36%)|**36.52** (_↑_80.61%)|35.39<br>(_↑_75.02%)|
||CodeGen 350M|15.24|24.39<br>(_↑_60.04%)|19.51 (_↑_28.02%)|18.29 (_↑_20.01%)|**25.00** (_↑_64.04%)|20.73 (_↑_36.02%)|
||CodeGen 2B|26.22|37.80<br>(_↑_44.16%)|31.71 (_↑_20.94%)|32.32 (_↑_23.26%)|**42.68** (_↑_62.78%)|35.37 (_↑_34.90%)|
||CodeGen 6B|27.44|43.90<br>(_↑_59.99%)|37.20 (_↑_35.57%)|32.32 (_↑_17.78%)|**44.51** (_↑_62.21%)|40.85 (_↑_48.87%)|
||StarCoder 1B|13.41|22.56 (_↑_68.23%)|18.29 (_↑_36.39%)|18.29 (_↑_36.39%)|**29.27** (_↑_118.27%)|26.22<br>(_↑_95.53%)|
||StarCoder 3B|17.07|34.76<br>(_↑_103.63%)|25.61 (_↑_50.03%)|26.22 (_↑_53.60%)|**40.85** (_↑_139.31%)|31.71 (_↑_85.76%)|
|HE-p|StarCoder 7B|22.56|39.02<br>(_↑_72.96%)|34.15 (_↑_51.37%)|34.76 (_↑_54.08%)|**43.29** (_↑_91.89%)|38.41 (_↑_70.26%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|12.20|20.12<br>(_↑_64.92%)|18.90 (_↑_54.92%)|17.07 (_↑_39.92%)|**23.78** (_↑_94.92%)|19.51 (_↑_59.92%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|17.68|27.44<br>(_↑_55.20%)|24.39 (_↑_37.95%)|24.39 (_↑_37.95%)|**32.32** (_↑_82.81%)|27.44<br>(_↑_55.20%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|25.00|39.02<br>(_↑_56.08%)|28.66 (_↑_14.64%)|29.88 (_↑_19.52%)|**39.63** (_↑_58.52%)|31.71 (_↑_26.84%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|26.83|46.34<br>(_↑_72.72%)|39.02 (_↑_45.43%)|37.20 (_↑_38.65%)|**48.78** (_↑_81.81%)|43.90 (_↑_63.62%)|



scenario on the HumanEval dataset (67.0). Moreover, the SelfCoT method proposed in our study can perform better than SelfPlanning and SCoT on all datasets. 

## _B. Ablation Study_ 

The data collection methodology for CodeCoT-9k relies on heuristic rules and multi-agent alignment. The heuristic rules (including Code Filtering, Document Filtering, and Similarity Filtering) have been widely used in training various LLMs (such as DeepSeek-Coder [66], StarCoder [40], CodeT5+ [41], and WizardCoder [67]), and their importance has been demonstrated. The multi-agent alignment, particularly the Quality Checker, has been proven by Gunasekar et al. [33] to be beneficial for training models with educational value. However, the specific contribution of the Consistency Checker to the overall quality of the dataset remains unclear. To evaluate the impact of the Consistency Checker, we conduct an ablation experiment. When the Consistency Checker is not applied, the dataset consists of 13k examples. In this experiment, we train COTTON separately on CodeCoT-9k and a 13k dataset without Consistency Checker filtering. 

The ablation results of the Consistency Checker are shown in Fig. 5 where we can observe that the use of the Consistency Checker has a significant impact on the performance of COTTON. Specifically, in terms of the Consistency metric, 





Fig. 5. The performance of COTTON by whether using the Consistency Checker. 

without the Consistency Checker for filtering, COTTON shows a relative performance decrease of 5.23% on HumanEval-CoT and 4.69% on OpenEval-CoT. 

## _C. Comparing COTTON With Other Tune Methods_ 

In this subsection, we first compare COTTON with traditional fine-tuning method using the StarCoder-series models as examples. The empirical study [36] shows that LoRA usually makes the most favorable trade-off between cost and performance in code generation tasks. Hence we mainly compare 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2450 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

TABLE IX 

THE PERFORMANCE OF CODE GENERATION MODELS WITH OR WITHOUT THE COTS GENERATED BY COTTON USING DIFFERENT BASE MODELS ON THE HUMANEVAL(HE), HUMANEVAL-PLUS(HE-P), AND OPENEVAL(OE) DATASETS (HERE COTTON IS BASED ON CODELLAMA-7B) 

|**Corus**|**Model**|**Pass@1**||**CoT-Pass@1** (Dif|ferent Base Models)|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**p**|||GraphCodeBERT|CodeGPT-adapter|NatGen|CodeGeeX2|COTTON|
||CodeGen 350M|14.63|15.24 (_↑_4.17%)|15.85 (_↑_8.34%)|18.90<br>(_↑_29.19%)|18.90<br>(_↑_29.19%)|**20.73** (_↑_41.70%)|
||CodeGen 2B|25.61|25.61|24.39|32.32 (_↑_26.20%)|33.54<br>(_↑_30.96%)|**34.76** (_↑_35.73%)|
||CodeGen 6B|27.44|31.71 (_↑_15.56%)|31.71 (_↑_15.56%)|34.15 (_↑_24.45%)|35.96<br>(_↑_19.51%)|**39.63** (_↑_44.42%)|
||StarCoder 1B|12.80|17.07 (_↑_33.36%)|15.24 (_↑_19.06%)|15.85 (_↑_23.83%)|19.51<br>(_↑_52.42%)|**25.00** (_↑_95.31%)|
|HE|StarCoder 3B|17.07|20.12 (_↑_17.87%)|19.51 (_↑_14.29%)|26.22 (_↑_53.60%)|**31.10** (_↑_82.19%)|30.49<br>(_↑_78.62%)|
||StarCoder 7B|21.95|28.05 (_↑_27.79%)|24.39 (_↑_11.12%)|30.49 (_↑_38.91%)|34.15<br>(_↑_55.58%)|**37.20** (_↑_69.48%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|12.20|12.80 (_↑_4.92%)|14.63 (_↑_19.92%)|17.07 (_↑_39.92%)|**18.90** (_↑_54.92%)|**18.90** (_↑_54.92%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|17.07|18.90 (_↑_10.72%)|18.29 (_↑_7.15%)|21.95 (_↑_28.59%)|25.00<br>(_↑_46.46%)|**26.83** (_↑_57.18%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|23.78|27.44 (_↑_15.39%)|25.00 (_↑_5.13%)|28.05 (_↑_17.96%)|**30.49** (_↑_28.22%)|**30.49** (_↑_28.22%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|26.22|31.71 (_↑_20.94%)|32.32 (_↑_23.26%)|37.80 (_↑_44.16%)|38.41<br>(_↑_46.49%)|**42.68** (_↑_62.78%)|
||CodeGen 350M|7.30|11.80 (_↑_61.64%)|12.36 (_↑_69.32%)|10.67 (_↑_46.16%)|**14.61** (_↑_100.14%)|12.92<br>(_↑_76.99%)|
||CodeGen 2B|16.85|17.42 (_↑_3.38%)|22.47 (_↑_33.35%)|25.28<br>(_↑_50.03%)|24.72 (_↑_46.71%)|**26.97** (_↑_60.06%)|
||CodeGen 6B|21.91|25.84 (_↑_17.94%)|24.72 (_↑_12.83%)|26.97 (_↑_23.09%)|28.09<br>(_↑_28.21%)|**33.71** (_↑_53.86%)|
||StarCoder 1B|8.99|11.24 (_↑_25.03%)|10.67 (_↑_18.69%)|11.80 (_↑_31.26%)|13.48<br>(_↑_49.94%)|**17.42** (_↑_93.77%)|
|OE|StarCoder 3B|11.24|11.80 (_↑_4.98%)|14.04 (_↑_24.91%)|16.29 (_↑_44.93%)|**20.22** (_↑_19.10%)|19.10<br>(_↑_69.93%)|
||StarCoder 7B|23.03|22.47|25.28 (_↑_9.77%)|25.28 (_↑_9.77%)|31.46<br>(_↑_36.60%)|**33.15** (_↑_43.94%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|7.87|9.55 (_↑_21.35%)|11.80 (_↑_49.94%)|**15.73** (_↑_99.87%)|15.17<br>(_↑_92.76%)|13.48 (_↑_71.28%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|9.55|15.17 (_↑_58.85%)|13.48 (_↑_41.15%)|13.48 (_↑_41.15%)|**16.85** (_↑_76.44%)|16.29<br>(_↑_70.58%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|15.17|17.42 (_↑_14.83%)|20.79 (_↑_37.05%)|23.03 (_↑_51.81%)|24.72<br>(_↑_62.95%)|**28.65** (_↑_88.86%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|20.22|23.60 (_↑_16.72%)|24.72 (_↑_22.26%)|24.16 (_↑_19.49%)|29.78<br>(_↑_47.28%)|**35.39** (_↑_75.02%)|
||CodeGen 350M|15.24|15.24|15.85 (_↑_4.00%)|18.90 (_↑_24.02%)|19.51<br>(_↑_28.02%)|**20.73** (_↑_36.02%)|
||CodeGen 2B|26.22|25.61|24.39|32.32 (_↑_23.26%)|**35.37** (_↑_34.90%)|**35.37** (_↑_34.90%)|
||CodeGen 6B|27.44|31.71 (_↑_15.56%)|31.71 (_↑_15.56%)|34.15 (_↑_24.45%)|36.59<br>(_↑_33.35%)|**40.85** (_↑_48.87%)|
||StarCoder 1B|13.41|17.07 (_↑_27.29%)|15.24 (_↑_13.65%)|15.85 (_↑_18.20%)|20.12<br>(_↑_50.04%)|**26.22** (_↑_95.53%)|
||StarCoder 3B|17.07|20.12 (_↑_17.87%)|19.51 (_↑_14.29%)|26.22(_↑_53.60%)|**31.71** (_↑_85.76%)|**31.71** (_↑_85.76%)|
|HE-p|StarCoder 7B|22.56|28.05 (_↑_24.34%)|24.39 (_↑_8.11%)|30.49 (_↑_35.15%)|34.76<br>(_↑_54.08%)|**38.41** (_↑_70.26%)|
||CodeT5+ 220M|12.20|12.80 (_↑_4.92%)|14.63 (_↑_19.92%)|17.07 (_↑_39.92%)|**19.51** (_↑_59.92%)|**19.51** (_↑_59.92%)|
||CodeT5+ 770M|17.68|18.90 (_↑_6.90%)|18.29 (_↑_3.45%)|21.95 (_↑_24.15%)|25.61<br>(_↑_44.85%)|**27.44** (_↑_55.20%)|
||CodeT5+ 2B|25.00|27.44 (_↑_9.76%)|25.00|28.05 (_↑_12.20%)|31.10<br>(_↑_24.40%)|**31.71** (_↑_26.84%)|
||CodeT5+ 6B|26.83|31.71 (_↑_18.19%)|32.32 (_↑_20.46%)|37.80 (_↑_40.89%)|39.02<br>(_↑_45.43%)|**43.90** (_↑_63.62%)|



### TABLE X 

EVALUATING COTTON AND OTHER COT PROMPT METHODS ON GPT-3.5-TURBO 

|**Corpus**|**Pass@1**|COTTON|**CoT-Pass@**<br>Self-Planning|**1**<br>SCoT|Self-CoT|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|HE|56.10|74.39|**77.44**|76.83|**77.44**|
|OE|26.97|43.26|42.70|44.38|**45.51**|
|HE-p|57.32|76.22|78.66|78.66|**79.27**|



COTTON with LoRA in our discussion. During the traditional fine-tuning process, natural language is used as input, and code is generated as output. 

Given that existing state-of-the-art instruction-tuning methods usually involve additional data, such as human feedback [68] and compiler feedback [69], [70], which can significantly improve the performance of downstream tasks of the model, we follow the method of Zheng et al. [71] and add CoT in the form of multi-turn dialogues during instruction-tuning to explore the impact of instruction-tuning on the performance of the model. 

The results shown in Table XI demonstrate that the combination of StarCoder-7B with COTTON can exceed the performance of StarCoder-16B in zero-shot scenarios and can even achieve results comparable to a fine-tuned/instructiontuned StarCoder-16B model. In addition, we find that multi-tune instruction-tuning method outperform traditional fine-tuning 

method, which is a finding similar to that of Zheng et al. [71]. We also find that COTTON, as an independent CoT generation model, can be combined with the fine-tuned/instruction-tuned model to further improve the performance of the model in code generation tasks. 

Furthermore, when considering GPU across model deployment, inference, and training with float16 precision (as shown in Table XII), we carefully set parameters including a maximum input and output length of 256 and a batch size of 1. It is important to highlight that fine-tuning a 7B model with LoRA already pushes the limits on a single consumer-grade GPU (GeForce RTX series). For individual developers, fine-tuning a 16B model would require multiple professional-grade GPUs (Quadro series and Tesla series), leading to significantly higher hardware costs compared to fine-tuning a 7B model. In contrast, COTTON enables performance enhancement across multiple models _without_ the need of fine-tuning individual model, which is highly desirable. 

## _D. The Impact of Different Decoding Strategies_ 

In the field of natural language processing [72], [73], the performance of downstream tasks depends not only on the quality of the model itself but also on the decoding strategy in the prediction stage. In this subsection, we evaluate the impact of different decoding strategies on the performance of COTTON. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2451 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

TABLE XI 

THE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF ZERO-SHOT, FINE-TUNING AND COTTON WITH STARCODER SERIES MODELS 

||**StarCoder**|Zero-Shot|**Pass@1**<br>Fine-Tune|Instruction-Tune|COTTON|**CoT-Pass@1**<br>COTTON w. Fine-Tune<br>COTTON w.|Instruction-Tune|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||1B|12.80|14.63 (_↑_14.30%)|16.46 (_↑_28.59%)|25.00 (_↑_95.31%)|25.00 (_↑_95.31%)<br>**28.05** (|_↑_119.14%)|
|HE|3B|17.07|22.56 (_↑_32.16%)|24.36 (_↑_42.71%)|30.49 (_↑_78.62%)|31.71 (_↑_85.76%)<br>**35.37** (|_↑_107.21%)|
||7B|21.95|25.61 (_↑_16.67%)|26.83 (_↑_22.23%)|37.20 (_↑_69.48%)|38.41 (_↑_74.99%)<br>**40.24** (|_↑_83.33%)|
||16B|34.10|37.80 (_↑_10.85%)|39.02 (_↑_14.43%)|43.90 (_↑_28.74%)|44.51 (_↑_30.53%)<br>**46.95** (|_↑_37.68%)|
||1B|8.99|8.43|11.24 (_↑_25.03%)|17.42 (_↑_93.77%)|17.98 (_↑_100%)<br>**20.22** (|_↑_124.92%)|
|OE|3B|11.24|18.54 (_↑_64.95%)|19.66 (_↑_74.91%)|19.10 (_↑_69.93%)|20.79 (_↑_84.96%)<br>**22.47** (|_↑_99.91%)|
||7B|23.03|24.16 (_↑_4.91%)|26.40 (_↑_14.63%)|33.15 (_↑_43.94%)|33.71 (_↑_46.37%)<br>**35.96** (|_↑_56.14%)|
||16B|27.53|29.78 (_↑_8.17%)|31.46 (_↑_14.28%)|39.33 (_↑_42.86%)|40.45 (_↑_46.93%)<br>**42.70** (|_↑_55.10%)|
||1B|13.41|14.63 (_↑_9.10%)|16.46 (_↑_22.74%)|26.22 (_↑_95.53%)|26.83 (_↑_100.07%)<br>**28.66** (|_↑_113.72%)|
|HE|3B|17.07|22.56 (_↑_32.16%)|24.36 (_↑_42.71%)|31.71 (_↑_85.76%)|31.71 (_↑_85.76%)<br>**36.59** (|_↑_114.35%)|
|-p|7B|22.56|26.22 (_↑_16.22%)|26.83 (_↑_22.23%)|38.41 (_↑_70.26%)|38.41 (_↑_74.99%)<br>**40.24** (|_↑_83.33%)|
||16B|34.10|38.41 (_↑_12.64%)|39.02 (_↑_14.43%)|44.51 (_↑_30.53%)|44.51 (_↑_30.53%)<br>**46.95** (|_↑_37.68%)|



### TABLE XII 

THE COMPARISON OF GPU MEMORY USAGE WITH STARCODER SERIES MODELS 

|**StarCoder**|**Deploy**|**Inference**|**Training (Lora)**|
|---|---|---|---|
|1B|2.34 GB|_∼_3.50 GB|_∼_12.00 GB|
|3B|6.15 GB|_∼_7.27 GB|_∼_16.00 GB|
|7B|14.72 GB|_∼_15.90 GB|_∼_23.00 GB|
|16B|31.88 GB|_∼_33.00 GB|_∼_40.00 GB|



We consider four classical decoding strategies [74] commonly used in text generation: 

- **Greedy Search.** This strategy selects the token with the highest probability at each decoding step, resulting in a deterministic output. 

- **Multinomial Sampling.** This strategy samples tokens from the probability distribution at each decoding step, introducing randomness into the output. 

- **Beam Search.** This strategy maintains a beam of the top- _k_ partial sequences and selects the most probable complete sequence based on the joint probability. 

- **Constrastive Search.** This strategy [75] aims to optimize a trade-off between exploration and exploitation during decoding by considering both the model’s predicted probability and the contrastive loss. 

We show the evaluation results of using different decoding strategies in Fig. 6 where we can find that the choice of decoding strategy does not have a significant impact on the performance of COTTON. Specifically, we only observe the minimal difference (i.e., variations of no more than 0.01) in terms of BLEU4, METEOR, and Rouge-L performance metrics. This suggests that COTTON consistently performs well across different decoding strategies, generating high-quality COTs that are comparable in terms of these performance metrics. Therefore, the effectiveness of COTTON in generating high-quality code does not heavily rely on the specific decoding strategy. 

## _E. The Impact of Different Prompt Methods_ 

In this subsection, we will evaluate the impact of different prompt methods on the performance of COTTON. We consider 





Fig. 6. The performance of COTTON by using different decoding strategies. 

four classical prompt methods [76] and one method without prompt: 

- **None:** This method refers to not using any prompt and letting the model generate CoTs without any specific guidance. 

- **Prefix Tuning:** This method [77] involves adding a taskspecific sequence of vectors before the model input as a prefix. 

- **Prompt Tuning:** This method [37] learns soft prompts to condition frozen language models for specific downstream tasks. 

- **P-Tuning:** This method [78] utilizes trainable continuous prompt embeddings in combination with discrete prompts. 

- **Alpaca Prompt.** This method [79] designs a specific template for the prompts used to finetune LoRA models. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2452 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

TABLE XIII 

THE PERFORMANCE OF COTTON UNDER DIFFERENT PROMPT METHODS 

|**Method**|**HumanE**<br>BLEU-4|**val-CoT**<br>Meteor|**OpenEv**<br>BLEU-4|**al-CoT**<br>Meteor|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|None|44.98|36.12|44.89|37.18|
|Prefx Tuning|46.25|37.48|47.72|38.23|
|Prompt Tuning|45.72|36.35|46.81|37.52|
|P-Tuning|45.43|36.87|46.23|37.67|
|Alpaca Prompt|45.56|37.05|47.36|37.90|
|Ours|46.87|38.22|48.80|38.80|



Table XIII shows the performance of COTTON under different prompt methods on the HumanEval-CoT and OpenEvalCoT datasets, measured by BLEU-4 and Meteor scores. Among the prompt methods, Prefix Tuning consistently achieves the highest scores on both datasets. It demonstrates the effectiveness of adding task-specific prefixes to guide the model’s responses. Prompt Tuning and Alpaca Prompt also show competitive performance, indicating the benefits of using learned soft prompts or specific prompt templates. 

However, our proposed prompt template outperforms all the other prompt methods. It achieves the highest scores on both datasets, surpassing the baseline and other promptbased approaches. This suggests that our method successfully leverages the strengths of the prompt methods while introducing additional improvements to enhance the model’s performance. 

This discussion shows that considering a variety of different prompt methods during model training can have unexpected benefits in improving model performance. Therefore, when targeting different downstream tasks, it is necessary to carefully try different prompt methods to maximize the potential of the model. 

## _F. The Impact of Different Hyper-Parameter Setting_ 

Recall that _R_ and _Alpha_ are the most important hyperparameters for LoRA, where _R_ represents the LoRA attention dimension and _Alpha_ represents the scaling parameter for LoRA. In this subsection, we analyze the effect of different hyper-parameter settings on the performance of COTTON. 

The results are shown in Table XIV, where we compare COTTON with other different hyper-parameter settings, and the performance is evaluated in terms of the BLEU-4 and METEOR metrics for both HumanEval-CoT and OpenEval-CoT. Based on the results, we find that a higher value of _Alpha_ tends to yield better performance. On the other hand, the impact of _R_ on COTTON performance is relatively less significant: varying its value does not lead to substantial performance improvement in terms of these evaluation metrics. 

## _G. Threats to Validity_ 

In this subsection, we analyze potential threats to the validity of our empirical study. 

### TABLE XIV 

THE PERFORMANCE OF COTTON UNDER DIFFERENT HYPER-PARAMETER SETTINGS 

|_R_|_Alpha_|**HumanE**<br>BLEU-4|**val-CoT**<br>Meteor|**OpenEv**<br>BLEU-4|**al-CoT**<br>Meteor|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||8|45.74|37.33|46.75|37.68|
|4|16|46.29|37.87|47.20|38.12|
||32|46.83|38.08|48.10|38.23|
||8|46.06|37.55|47.65|38.39|
|8|16|46.87|**38.22**|**48.80**|**38.80**|
||32|**46.95**|38.15|48.60|38.54|
||8|45.52|37.12|46.88|37.25|
|16|16|46.41|37.91|47.95|37.41|
||32|46.68|38.02|48.45|38.12|



**Threats to Internal Validity.** The first internal threat is the possibility of implementation faults in COTTON. To mitigate this threat, we conduct a careful code inspection of the implementation and utilize well-established third-party libraries (such as PyTorch and Transformers). The second internal threat is the implementation correctness of the considered baselines. To alleviate this threat, we implemented all baselines based on their shared models on platforms such as Hugging Face<sup>12</sup> . 

**Threats to External Validity.** The main external threat lies in the datasets used in our study. To mitigate this threat, we start by selecting widely used open datasets as the raw data for CoT generation. We then apply three heuristic rule-based cleaning methods to preprocess these datasets. Moreover, we propose a multi-agent alignment-based method that leverages multiple agents to align and clean the data. For the code generation dataset, we select popular HumanEval and HumanEval-plus datasets. To ensure the generalization ability of COTTON on another dataset, we also construct a new code generation dataset OpenEval, which provides a diverse and challenging set of programming tasks that could evaluate the model’s ability to generate high-quality code. 

**Threats to Construct Validity.** The main construct threat is related to the metrics used in our automated evaluation. By treating CoT generation as a text generation problem, we utilize metrics based on term overlap (such as **BLEU** , **METEOR** , and **ROUGE-L** ), which have been commonly used in similar studies on programming language processing [80], [81]. Moreover, we introduce the **Consistency** metric to assess alignment based on the nature of the code generation task under investigation. Furthermore, to ensure the generalizability of COTTON, we collect a new code generation dataset OpenEval. We manually design five test cases for each problem to ensure as much quality as possible for OpenEval. Finally, we employ **Pass@1** and **CoTPass@1** to evaluate the performance of code generation models. It is noticed that the Pass@k metric would significantly increase the computational cost of the evaluation, especially when k is large, in our study we decided to focus only on the Pass@1 metric in the evaluation, which reflects the actual ability of the model to generate the correct code for a given input in one go, which is the most critical aspect of functional correctness. To 

12https://huggingface.co/models 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2453 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

complement automated evaluation, we also conducted a human study to validate the effectiveness of our proposed approach further. To guarantee the quality of our human study, we follow the human study methodology used in previous studies of similar software engineering tasks [61], [82]. 

## VII. RELATED WORK 

In this section, we summarize related studies on neural code generation and chain of thought generation. 

## _A. Code Generation_ 

Earlier research on neural code generation predominantly relied on heuristic rules and expert systems, such as probabilistic grammar-based approaches [83], [84] and domain-specific language techniques [85], [86]. However, these methods exhibited inflexibility and lacked scalability [86]. Other studies attempted to utilize static language models such as n-gram [87], [88] and Hidden Markov models [89], but they struggled with sparse vector representations and failed to effectively capture long-term dependencies. Consequently, researchers turned their attention to neural networks, specifically CNN [90], [91], RNN [92], [93], and LSTM [94], [95], to model the relationship between natural language and code. In 2017, the Transformer model [23], initially designed for machine translation, was introduced and later applied to the task of neural code generation [96], [97]. However, these deep learning models require a substantial amount of (labeled) natural language and code pairs for training and have inherent limitations in their capabilities. 

With the development of language models, researchers have seen a diagram shift to pre-training and fine-tuning in neural code generation. At this stage, models with less than 1 billion parameters are commonly used. For instance, CodeBERT [54] has been utilized for automatic generation of exploit code [43], [98], while CodeGPT [56] has been applied to automatic generation of Java and Python code. PLBART [57] and CodeT5 [58] are pre-trained on multiple programming languages, making them suitable as base models for multi-language code generation tasks. Built upon the CodeT5 model, code of mixed programming styles (turducken) was generated where multi-task learning was used to enforce syntactic constraints [44]. In addition, models such as JuPyT5 [99] and PyMT5 [99] focus on the Python language specifically. They construct dedicated datasets and further enhance code generation performance through fine-tuning. 

More recently, there has been a remarkable advancement in the development of LLMs with over 10 billion parameters. These models have demonstrated the ability to generate code in a zero-shot manner. A notable milestone is Codex [25], which boasts an impressive 12 billion parameters. Codex has showcased its capabilities by solving 72.31% of challenging Python programming problems created by humans. This model has also been successfully integrated into the commercial product Copilot.<sup>13</sup> Following the success of Codex, several other LLMs designed specifically for code generation tasks have emerged. For 

13https://github.com/features/copilot 

example, AlphaCode [2] focuses on solving competitive-level programming problems, while InCoder [100] supports code completion in arbitrary positions using bidirectional contexts. Additional models include CodeGen [19], [101], StarCoder [40], WizardCoder [67], OctoCoder [102] and CodeLlama [27], which have demonstrated their potential to solve complex programming problems and assist developers in various settings. 

However, fine-tuning these LLMs can be computationally expensive and resource-intensive. The focus of the current paper is the _ℓ_ LMs which we intend to use for code generation without updating parameters. In particular, we leverage the newly introduced CoT technology, which, as shown in the current paper, can be an effective means to improve the quality and accuracy of the generated code by _ℓ_ LM. Our study provides a cost-effective alternative to _ℓ_ LMs directly for code generation, making them more accessible for a wider range of applications and users. 

## _B. Chain of Thought Generation_ 

As the number of model parameters and volume of training data increase, LLMs have demonstrated impressive reasoning capabilities [103]. Recently, there has been a growing interest in enhancing the performance of LLMs in downstream tasks without the need to update model parameters. One way to achieve this is to harness the inferential reasoning abilities of LLMs, a notable approach of which is the CoT prompting method [12]. This method enables LLMs to provide reliable answers through thoughtful consideration and explanation. Various approaches have been studied aiming to generate more accurate and reliable CoT possibly using LLMs themselves. For instance, He et al. [104] incorporate external knowledge as supporting information to generate more faithful CoT. Wang et al. [105] utilize self-consistency by generating multiple inference paths and answers, selecting the most frequently occurring answer as the final output, thereby improving the quality of CoT. Creswell et al. [106] propose a selection-inference framework that employs LLMs as general processing modules. This framework alternates between selection and inference steps, generating a series of interpretable, causal reasoning steps leading to the final answer. Zhou et al. [107] introduce the least-to-most prompting method, which breaks down complex problems into simpler subproblems and solves them sequentially. 

The methods have limitations in relying on LLMs with more than 100 billion parameters. Researchers have developed smaller language models via knowledge distillation. Ho et al. [108] introduced Fine-tune-CoT, which leverages GPT3(175B) as a reasoning teacher to enable complex reasoning in smaller models, thereby significantly reducing the model size requirements. Li et al. [109] proposed Symbolic Chain-of-Thought Distillation (SCoTD), a method for training smaller student models using rationalizations sampled from a much larger teacher model. This approach distills the reasoning capabilities of the larger model into smaller models. Shridhar et al. [110] utilized the step-by-step Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning capabilities of larger models and distilled these abilities into smaller models. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2454 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

Our primary objective is to generate high-quality CoTs for code generation at a manageable cost. Apart from the domainspecific features in constructing CoT, we design a stand-alone model of relatively small sizes dedicated to CoT generation which can improve the performance code generation. 

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions, which can substantially improve the quality of this work. 

## REFERENCES 

## _C. Multi-Agent Collaboration_ 

Multi-agent collaboration refers to a framework where multiple autonomous agents interact with each other in a shared environment. These agents can be program scripts, software bots, or robots, each with their capabilities, goals, and perceptions [111]. They can communicate, cooperate, compete, or negotiate with each other to achieve complex goals or solve problems. LLMs within multi-agent collaboration systems is an emerging area of research in the deep learning community [112]. 

For instance, Zhang et al. [113] proposed ProAgent, a system designed for robotic tasks that analyzes the current context, anticipates teammates’ intentions, and formulates strategies based on this reasoning. Chen et al. [114] developed VisualGPT, which leverages vision-based Pretrained Language Models for image captioning tasks. In terms of code generation, Huang et al. [115] proposed AgentCoder, a novel solution comprising a multi-agent framework with the programmer agent, the test designer agent, and the test executor agent. 

Our proposed multi-agent alignment-based cleaning method contains Quality Checker, CoT Generator, and Consistency Checker. Quality Checker serves the purpose of evaluating and filtering the educational significance of the code, while the CoT Generator focuses on generating the corresponding CoTs. Additionally, the Consistency Checker plays a crucial role in assessing and filtering the semantic consistency of the generated CoTs with the code. These three agents possess unique capabilities and task goals, enabling them to communicate and collaborate effectively to produce high-quality CoTs. 

## VIII. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we have introduced CodeCoT-9k and COTTON, which leverage lightweight language models (with parameters less than 10B) to generate high-quality CoT for code generation. We have demonstrated the effectiveness and efficiency of COTTON in generating high-quality code CoTs. When equipped with these CoTs, existing _ℓ_ LMs have demonstrated significant performance improvements in code generation tasks. Our study enables _ℓ_ LMs to perform the code generation task better without additional updates to model parameters, making them more accessible to individual users. 

Potential future research includes further improving the performance of COTTON. We plan to extend COTTON to other programming languages and explore various potentially promising techniques, such as retrieval augmented generation, adversarial training and contrastive learning. Moreover, based on the results of our study, it is important and promising to explore the lightweight language models for other software engineering tasks. 

- [1] A. Svyatkovskiy, S. K. Deng, S. Fu, and N. Sundaresan, “IntelliCode compose: Code generation using transformer,” in _Proc. 28th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng._ , 2020, pp. 1433–1443. 

- [2] Y. Li, et al., “Competition-level code generation with alphacode,” _Science_ , vol. 378, no. 6624, pp. 1092–1097, 2022. 

- [3] R. A. Poldrack, T. Lu, and G. Beguš, “AI-assisted coding: Experiments with GPT-4,” 2023, _arXiv:2304.13187_ . 

- [4] J. Liu, C. S. Xia, Y. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Is your code generated by chatGPT really correct? Rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2305.01210_ . 

- [5] J. Kaddour, J. Harris, M. Mozes, H. Bradley, R. Raileanu, and R. McHardy, “Challenges and applications of large language models,” 2023, _arXiv:2307.10169_ . 

- [6] A. Nazir and Z. Wang, “A comprehensive survey of chatGPT: Advancements, applications, prospects, and challenges,” _Meta-Radiol._ , vol. 1, no. 2, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 100022. 

- [7] Y. Fu, H. Peng, L. Ou, A. Sabharwal, and T. Khot, “Specializing smaller language models towards multi-step reasoning,” 2023, _arXiv:2301.12726_ . 

- [8] C. Liu et al., “Improving chatGPT prompt for code generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2305.08360_ . 

- [9] N. Nashid, M. Sintaha, and A. Mesbah, “Retrieval-based prompt selection for code-related few-shot learning,” in _Proc. 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE)_ , 2023, pp. 2450–2462. 

- [10] J. Cao, M. Li, M. Wen, and S.-C. Cheung, “A study on prompt design, advantages and limitations of chatGPT for deep learning program repair,” 2023, _arXiv:2304.08191_ . 

- [11] J. White, S. Hays, Q. Fu, J. Spencer-Smith, and D. C. Schmidt, “ChatGPT prompt patterns for improving code quality, refactoring, requirements elicitation, and Software Design,” 2023, _arXiv:2303.07839_ . 

- [12] J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” in _Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 35, 2022, pp. 24824–24837. 

- [13] X. Jiang, Y. Dong, L. Wang, Q. Shang, and G. Li, “Self-planning code generation with large language model,” 2023, _arXiv:2303.06689_ . 

- [14] J. Li, G. Li, Y. Li, and Z. Jin, “Structured chain-of-thought prompting for code generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2305.06599_ . 

- [15] T. Y. Zhuo, “Large language models are state-of-the-art evaluators of code generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2304.14317_ . 

- [16] J. Huang and K. C.-C. Chang, “Towards reasoning in large language models: A survey,” 2022, _arXiv:2212.10403_ . 

- [17] S. Qiao et al., “Reasoning with language model prompting: A survey,” 2022, _arXiv:2212.09597_ . 

- [18] T. Kojima, S. S. Gu, M. Reid, Y. Matsuo, and Y. Iwasawa, “Large language models are zero-shot reasoners,” in _Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 35, 2022, pp. 22199–22213. 

- [19] E. Nijkamp et al., “CodeGen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis,” in _Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2022. 

- [20] D. N. Manh et al., “The vault: A comprehensive multilingual dataset for advancing code understanding and generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2305.06156_ . 

- [21] B. Zhang and R. Sennrich, “Root mean square layer normalization,” in _Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 32, 2019, pp. 12360–12371. 

- [22] J. Ainslie, J. Lee-Thorp, M. de Jong, Y. Zemlyanskiy, F. Lebrón, and S. Sanghai, “GQA: Training generalized multi-query transformer models from multi-head checkpoints,” 2023, _arXiv:2305.13245_ . 

- [23] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in _Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008. 

- [24] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,” in _Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2021. 

- [25] M. Chen et al., “Evaluating large language models trained on code,” 2021, _arXiv:2107.03374_ . 

- [26] A. Zeng et al., “GLM-130B: An open bilingual pre-trained model,” in _Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2022. 

- [27] B. Rozière et al., “Code Llama: Open foundation models for code,” 2023, _arXiv:2308.12950_ . 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2455 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

- [28] H. Touvron et al., “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” 2023, _arXiv:2307.09288_ . 

- [29] Y. Yang, X. Xia, D. Lo, and J. Grundy, “A survey on deep learning for software engineering,” _ACM Comput. Surveys_ , vol. 54, no. 10s, pp. 1– 73, 2022. 

- [30] J. Su, Y. Lu, S. Pan, A. Murtadha, B. Wen, and Y. Liu, “RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding,” 2021, _arXiv:2104.09864_ . 

- [31] T. Dao, D. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. Ré, “FlashAttention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness,” in _Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 35, 2022, pp. 16344–16359. 

- [32] X. Hou et al., “Large language models for software engineering: A systematic literature review,” 2023, _arXiv:2308.10620_ . 

- [33] S. Gunasekar et al., “Textbooks are all you need,” 2023, _arXiv:2306.11644_ . 

- [34] A. T. V. Dau, N. D. Q. Bui, and J. L. C. Guo “Bootstrapping code-text pretrained language model to detect inconsistency between code and comment,” 2024, _arXiv:2306.06347_ . 

- [35] L. Wang et al., “A survey on large language model based autonomous agents,” 2023, _arXiv:2308.11432_ . 

- [36] T. Y. Zhuo et al., “Astraios: Parameter-efficient instruction tuning code large language models,” 2024, _arXiv:2401.00788_ . 

- [37] B. Lester, R. Al-Rfou, and N. Constant, “The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning,” in _Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process._ , 2021, pp. 3045–3059. 

- [38] Y. Gu, X. Han, Z. Liu, and M. Huang, “PPT: Pre-trained prompt tuning for few-shot learning,” in _Proc. 60th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics_ (Vol. 1: Long Papers), 2022, pp. 8410–8423. 

- [39] W. U. Ahmad, M. G. R. Tushar, S. Chakraborty, and K.-W. Chang, “AVATAR: A parallel corpus for Java-Python program translation,” 2021, _arXiv:2108.11590_ . 

- [40] R. Li et al., ‘‘StarCoder: May the source be with you!” 2023, _arXiv:2305.06161_ . 

- [41] Y. Wang, H. Le, A. D. Gotmare, N. D. Bui, J. Li, and S. C. Hoi, “CodeT5+: Open code large language models for code understanding and generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2305.07922_ . 

- [42] Z. Zhang et al., “Unifying the perspectives of NLP and software engineering: A survey on language models for code,” 2023, _arXiv:2311.07989_ . 

- [43] G. Yang, Y. Zhou, X. Chen, X. Zhang, T. Han, and T. Chen, “ExploitGen: Template-augmented exploit code generation based on CodeBERT,” _J. Syst. Softw._ , vol. 197, 2023, Art. no. 111577. 

- [44] G. Yang et al., “A syntax-guided multi-task learning approach for Turducken-style code generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2303.05061_ . 

- [45] G. Yang, K. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Zhou, C. Yu, and H. Lin, “CCGIR: Information retrieval-based code comment generation method for smart contracts,” _Knowl.-Based Syst._ , vol. 237, 2022, Art. no. 107858. 

- [46] G. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Zhou, and C. Yu, “DualSC: Automatic generation and summarization of shellcode via transformer and dual learning,” in _Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Anal., Evol. Reeng. (SANER),_ Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2022, pp. 361–372. 

- [47] G. Yang, Y. Zhou, X. Zhang, X. Chen, T. Han, and T. Chen, “Assessing and improving syntactic adversarial robustness of pre-trained models for code translation,” 2023, _arXiv:2310.18587_ . 

- [48] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, “BLEU: A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation,” in _Proc. 40th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics_ , 2002, pp. 311–318. 

- [49] S. Banerjee and A. Lavie, “METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments,” in _Proc. ACL Workshop Intrinsic Extrinsic Eval. Meas. Mach. Transl. Summarization_ , 2005, pp. 65–72. 

- [50] C.-Y. Lin, “ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries,” in _Text summarization Branches Out_ , in _Proc. ACL-04 Workshop, Barcelona, Spain_ , 2004, pp. 74–81. 

- [51] I. Team, “InternLM: A multilingual language model with progressively enhanced capabilities,” 2023. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available:https://github.com/InternLM/InternLM 

- [52] G. Team et al., “Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models,” 2023, _arXiv:2312.11805_ . 

- [53] J. Achiam et al., “GPT-4 technical report,” 2023, _arXiv:2303.08774_ . 

- [54] Z. Feng et al., “CodeBERT: A pre-trained model for programming and natural languages,” in _Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: EMNLP 2020_ , 2020, pp. 1536–1547. 

- [55] D. Guo et al., “GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training code representations with data flow,” in _Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2020. 

- [56] S. Lu et al., “CodeXGLUE: A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understanding and generation,” in _Proc. 35th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track (Round 1)_ , 2021. 

- [57] W. Ahmad, S. Chakraborty, B. Ray, and K.-W. Chang, “Unified pretraining for program understanding and generation,” in _Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: Human Lang. Technol._ , 2021, pp. 2655–2668. 

- [58] Y. Wang, W. Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. Hoi, “CodeT5: Identifier-aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation,” in _Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process._ , 2021, pp. 8696–8708. 

- [59] S. Chakraborty, T. Ahmed, Y. Ding, P. T. Devanbu, and B. Ray, “NatGen: Generative pre-training by “naturalizing” source code,” in _Proc. 30th ACM Joint Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found, Softw. Eng._ , 2022, pp. 18–30. 

- [60] Q. Zheng et al., “CodeGeeX: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual benchmarking on HumanEval-X,” in _Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining_ , 2023, pp. 5673–5684. 

- [61] B. Wei, Y. Li, G. Li, X. Xia, and Z. Jin, “Retrieve and refine: Exemplarbased neural comment generation,” in _Proc. 35th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng. (ASE),_ Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2020, pp. 349–360. 

- [62] K. Liu, X. Chen, C. Chen, X. Xie, and Z. Cui, “Automated question title reformulation by mining modification logs from stack overflow,” _IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng._ , vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 4390–4410, Sep. 2023. 

- [63] J. Li, Y. Li, G. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Hao, and X. Hu, “SkCoder: A sketch-based approach for automatic code generation,” 2023, _arXiv:2302.06144_ . 

- [64] R. A. Fisher, “On the interpretation of _χ_ 2 from contingency tables, and the calculation of P,” _J. R. Statist. Soc._ , vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 87–94, 1922. 

- [65] J. L. Fleiss, “Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters,” _Psychol. Bull._ , vol. 76, no. 5, 1971, Art. no. 378. 

- [66] D. Guo et al., “DeepSeek-coder: When the large language model meets programming–The rise of code intelligence,” 2024, _arXiv:2401.14196_ . 

- [67] Z. Luo et al., “WizardCoder: Empowering code large language models with Evol-Instruct,” 2023, _arXiv:2306.08568_ . 

- [68] A. Chen et al., “Improving code generation by training with natural language feedback,” 2023, _arXiv:2303.16749_ . 

- [69] S. Dou et al., “StepCoder: Improve code generation with reinforcement learning from compiler feedback,” 2024, _arXiv:2402.01391_ . 

- [70] J. Yang, A. Prabhakar, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao, “InterCode: Standardizing and benchmarking interactive coding with execution feedback,” in _Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 36, 2024, pp. 23826–23854. 

- [71] T. Zheng et al., “OpenCodeInterpreter: Integrating code generation with execution and refinement,” 2024, _arXiv:2402.14658_ . 

- [72] L. Massarelli et al., “How decoding strategies affect the verifiability of generated text,” in _Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: EMNLP_ , 2020, pp. 223–235. 

- [73] G. Wiher, C. Meister, and R. Cotterell, “On decoding strategies for neural text generators,” _Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics_ , vol. 10, pp. 997–1012, 2022. 

- [74] H. Face, “Text generation strategies.” 2023. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/ generation_strategies#decoding-strategies 

- [75] Y. Su, T. Lan, Y. Wang, D. Yogatama, L. Kong, and N. Collier, “A contrastive framework for neural text generation,” in _Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 35, 2022, pp. 21548–21561. 

- [76] S. Mangrulkar, S. Gugger, L. Debut, Y. Belkada, S. Paul, and B. Bossan, “PEFT: State-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods,” 2022. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/huggingface/peft 

- [77] X. L. Li and P. Liang, “Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation,” in _Proc. 59th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics 11th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process._ (Vol.1: Long Papers), 2021, pp. 4582–4597. 

- [78] X. Liu et al., “GPT understands, too,” _AI Open_ , 2023, _arXiv:2103.10385_ . 

- [79] “Alpaca-LoRA: Instruct-tune LLaMA on consumer hardware,” 2023. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/tloen/ alpaca-lora 

- [80] Z. Gao, X. Xia, J. Grundy, D. Lo, and Y.-F. Li, “Generating question titles for stack overflow from mined code snippets,” _ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol._ , vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1–37, 2020. 

- [81] K. Liu, G. Yang, X. Chen, and C. Yu, “SOTitle: A transformer-based post title generation approach for stack overflow,” in _Proc. 29th IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Anal., Evol. Reeng. (SANER)_ , 2022. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2456 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 

- [82] S. Jiang, A. Armaly, and C. McMillan, “Automatically generating commit messages from diffs using neural machine translation,” in _Proc. 32nd IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng. (ASE),_ Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 135–146. 

- [83] T. Cohn, P. Blunsom, and S. Goldwater, “Inducing tree-substitution grammars,” _J. Mach. Learn. Res._ , vol. 11, pp. 3053–3096, 2010. 

- [84] M. Allamanis and C. Sutton, “Mining idioms from source code,” in _Proc. 22nd ACM SIGSOFT Int. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng._ , 2014, pp. 472–483. 

- [85] S. Gulwani, “Dimensions in program synthesis,” in _Proc. 12th Int. ACM SIGPLAN Symp. Princ. Pract. Declarative Program._ , 2010, pp. 13–24. 

- [86] D. Zan et al., “Large language models meet NL2Code: A survey,” in _Proc. 61st Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics_ (Vol. 1 Long Papers), 2023, pp. 7443–7464. 

- [87] T. T. Nguyen, A. T. Nguyen, H. A. Nguyen, and T. N. Nguyen, “A statistical semantic language model for source code,” in _Proc. 9th Joint Meeting Found. Softw. Eng._ , 2013, pp. 532–542. 

- [88] V. Raychev, M. Vechev, and E. Yahav, “Code completion with statistical language models,” in _Proc. 35th ACM SIGPLAN Conf. Program. Lang. Des. Implementation_ , 2014, pp. 419–428. 

- [89] I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, and G. W. Taylor, “The recurrent temporal restricted Noltzmann machine,” in _Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._ , vol. 21, 2008, pp. 1601–1608. 

- [90] Z. Liu, Y. Dou, J. Jiang, and J. Xu, “Automatic code generation of convolutional neural networks in FPGA implementation,” in _Proc. Int. Conf. Field-Programmable Technol. (FPT),_ Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2016, pp. 61–68. 

- [91] Z. Sun, Q. Zhu, L. Mou, Y. Xiong, G. Li, and L. Zhang, “A grammarbased structural CNN decoder for code generation,” in _Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell._ , vol. 33, no. 1, 2019, pp. 7055–7062. 

- [92] S. Iyer, I. Konstas, A. Cheung, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Summarizing source code using a neural attention model,” in _Proc. 54th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics_ , Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016, pp. 2073–2083. 

- [93] Y. Wan, Z. Zhao, M. Yang, G. Xu, H. Ying, J. Wu, and P. S. Yu, “Improving automatic source code summarization via deep reinforcement learning,” in _Proc. 33rd ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng._ , 2018, pp. 397–407. 

- [94] A. Eriguchi, K. Hashimoto, and Y. Tsuruoka, “Tree-to-sequence attentional neural machine translation,” in _Proc. 54th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics_ (Vol. 1 Long Papers), 2016, pp. 823–833. 

- [95] P. Yin and G. Neubig, “A syntactic neural model for general-purpose code generation,” in _Proc. 55th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics_ (Vol. 1 Long Papers), 2017, pp. 440–450. 

- [96] A. Mastropaolo et al., “Studying the usage of text-to-text transfer transformer to support code-related tasks,” in _Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE),_ Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 336–347. 

- [97] M. Shah, R. Shenoy, and R. Shankarmani, “Natural language to Python source code using transformers,” in _Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Technol. (CONIT),_ Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 1–4. 

- [98] P. Liguori, E. Al-Hossami, V. Orbinato, R. Natella, S. Shaikh, D. Cotroneo, and B. Cukic, “EVIL: exploiting software via natural language,” in _Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng. (ISSRE),_ Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 321–332. 

- [99] S. Chandel, C. B. Clement, G. Serrato, and N. Sundaresan, “Training and evaluating a Jupyter Notebook data science assistant,” 2022, _arXiv:2201.12901_ . 

- [100] D. Fried et al., “InCoder: A generative model for code infilling and synthesis,” in _11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2022. 

- [101] E. Nijkamp, H. Hayashi, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, and Y. Zhou, “CodeGen2: Lessons for training LLMs on programming and natural languages,” 2023, _arXiv:2305.02309_ . 

- [102] N. Muennighoff et al., “OctoPack: Instruction tuning code large language models,” 2023, _arXiv:2308.07124_ . 

- [103] J. Wei et al., “Emergent abilities of large language models,” _Trans. Mach. Learn. Res._ , 2022. 

- [104] H. He, H. Zhang, and D. Roth, “Rethinking with retrieval: Faithful large language model inference,” 2022, _arXiv:2301.00303_ . 

- [105] X. Wang et al., “Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,” in _Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2022. 

- [106] A. Creswell, M. Shanahan, and I. Higgins, “Selection-inference: Exploiting large language models for interpretable logical reasoning,” in _Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2022. 

- [107] D. Zhou et al., “Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models,” in _Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations_ , 2022. 

- [108] N. Ho, L. Schmid, and S.-Y. Yun, “Large language models are reasoning teachers,” 2022, _arXiv:2212.10071_ . 

- [109] L. H. Li, J. Hessel, Y. Yu, X. Ren, K.-W. Chang, and Y. Choi, “Symbolic chain-of-thought distillation: Small models can also “think” step-by-step,” 2023, _arXiv:2306.14050_ . 

- [110] K. Shridhar, A. Stolfo, and M. Sachan, “Distilling multi-step reasoning capabilities of large language models into smaller models via semantic decompositions,” 2022, _arXiv:2212.00193_ . 

- [111] W. Du and S. Ding, “A survey on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: From the perspective of challenges and applications,” _Artif. Intell. Rev._ , vol. 54, pp. 3215–3238, 2021. 

- [112] S. Agashe, Y. Fan, and X. E. Wang, “Evaluating multi-agent coordination abilities in large language models,” 2023, _arXiv:2310.03903_ . 

- [113] C. Zhang et al., “ProAgent: Building proactive cooperative AI with large language models,” 2023, _arXiv:2308.11339_ . 

- [114] J. Chen, H. Guo, K. Yi, B. Li, and M. Elhoseiny, “VisualGPT: Data-efficient adaptation of pretrained language models for image captioning,” in _Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit._ , 2022, pp. 18030–18040. 

- [115] D. Huang, Q. Bu, J. M. Zhang, M. Luck, and H. Cui, “AgentCoder: Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative testing and optimisation,” 2023, _arXiv:2312.13010_ . 



**Guang Yang** received the M.D. degree in computer technology from Nantong University, Nantong, in 2022. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing. His research interest includes AI4SE. He has authored or co-authored more than 20 papers in refereed journals or conferences, such as ACM _Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology_ , _Empirical Software Engineering, Journal of Systems and Software_ , International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution, and International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering. For more information, see https://ntdxyg.github.io/. 



**Yu Zhou** received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Nanjing University China, in 2004 and 2009, respectively. In 2011, he conducted the Postdoctoral research on software engineering with the Politechnico di Milano, Italy. He is a Full Professor in the College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. From 2015 to 2016, he visited the SEAL Lab with the University of Zurich Switzerland, where he is also an Adjunct Researcher. His research interests include generative models for software engineering, software evolution analysis, mining software repositories, and reliability analysis. He has been supported by several national research programs in China. For more information, see https://csyuzhou. github.io/. 



**Xiang Chen** received the B.Sc. degree in the School of Management from Xi’an Jiaotong University, China, in 2002 and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer software and theory from Nanjing University, China, in 2008 and 2011, respectively. Currently, he is an Associate Professor with the Department of Information Science and Technology, Nantong University, Nantong, China. He has authored or co-authored more than 120 papers in refereed journals or conferences, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, ACM _Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology_ , _Empirical Software Engineering_ , _Information and Software Technology_ , _Journal of Systems and Software_ , International Conference on Software Engineering, The ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, International Conference Automated Software Engineering. His research interests include software engineering, in particular software testing and maintenance, software repository mining, and empirical 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2457 

YANG et al.: CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT IN NEURAL CODE GENERATION 

software engineering. He received two ACM SIGSOFT Distinguished Paper Awards in ICSE 2021 and ICPC 2023. He is the Editorial Board Member of Information and Software Technology. For more information, see https:// xchencs.github.io/index.html. 



**Xiangyu Zhang** is currently working toward the master’s degree with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. His research interests include code generation and model interpretability. 



**Terry Yue Zhuo** received the B.Sc. degree from the University of New South Wales, Sydney, in 2021, and the B.Sc. (Hons.) degree from Monash University, Australia, in 2022. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with Monash University and CSIRO’s Data61, Australia. He is also working with the CSIRO’s Data61 as a Research Engineer and visiting the SOAR group with Singapore Management University. He has authored more than 15 papers in refereed journals or conferences, such as The Web Conference, ACM _Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology_ , Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. He received the Best Paper Award in the Deep Learning for Code workshop in ICRL 2023. His research interests include empirical software engineering, code intelligence, and responsible AI. For more information, see https://terryyz.github.io/. 



**Taolue Chen** received the bachelor’s and master’s degrees in computer science from Nanjing University, China, and the Ph.D. degree from Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands. He was a Junior Researcher with Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica. Currently, he is a Lecturer with the School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London. He had been a Postdoctoral Researcher with the University of Oxford (U.K.) and University of Twente (NL). His research spans software engineering, program language, verification, and machine learning. His present research focus is at the interface of software engineering and machine learning. He applies verification and programming language techniques to improve the trustworthiness of machine learning models. Meanwhile, he applies data-driven approaches to support software development. He has published over 140 papers in journals and conferences such as POPL, LICS, CAV, OOPSLA, ICSE, ESEC/FSE, ASE, ETAPS (TACAS, FoSSaCS, ESOP, FASE), NeurIPS, ICLR, IJCAI, AAAI, EMNLP, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, ACM _Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology_ , _Empirical Software Engineering_ , ACM _Transactions on Computational Logic_ , _Information and Computation, Logical Methods in Computer Science_ . He won the Best Paper Award of SETTA’20, the 1st Prize in the CCF Software Prototype Competition 2022, and the QF_Strings (Single Query Track) at the International Satisfiability Modulo Theories Competition 2023. He has served as an Editorial Board or Program Committee for various international journals and conferences. For more information, see https://chentaolue.github.io/. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 21:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.